ANXIETY
Fact Sheet
Anxiety disorders are the most common mental illnesses in the United States, affecting over 40 million adults
every year. Anxiety is treatable; however, some racial and ethnic minority groups face additional challenges
getting the care they need.
Office of Minority Health and Health Equity
What is anxiety? Who is affected by anxiety disorders?
Occasional anxiousness is a normal part of life. However, with Anxiety disorders can affect people of all ages, races,
anxiety disorders, everyday situations can trigger feelings of ethnicities, and genders. Certain people may be at higher risk
worry or fear that are intense, persistent, or uncontrollable. of developing an anxiety disorder such as people with a family
Anxiety disorders can interfere with work, school, family, history of anxiety or other mental disorders, or people who
relationships, social life, and overall well-being. have been exposed to stressful and negative life or
environmental events.
Having an anxiety disorder is a risk factor for depression, and
both disorders can occur together. Living with an untreated How are anxiety disorders diagnosed?
mental health disorder can have serious consequences.
A health care provider will ask questions about your feelings,
mood, behavior patterns, and other aspects of your life. This
What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders?
screening may include a physical exam and blood test to rule
Symptoms of anxiety disorders vary from person to person. out physical causes.
Common symptoms include:
• Worrying excessively about everyday things
How to Get Help Now
• Trouble controlling worries or feelings of nervousness
If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, help
• Feeling restless, wound-up, irritable, or on-edge
is available. Call or text 988 to access the Suicide & Crisis
• Difficulty concentrating Lifeline. You can also access the Lifeline via web chat at
• Difficultly falling or staying asleep 988lifeline.org. The Lifeline provides free and confidential
emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional
• Headaches, muscle aches, stomachaches, or unexplained
distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a week in the United
pains
States and U.S. territories.
How are anxiety disorders treated?
Anxiety disorders are treatable. Treatments can include
psychotherapy, or “talk therapy,” stress management
techniques, FDA-approved medications, such as anti-anxiety or
antidepressants, or a combination of these treatments. Talk to a
health care provider to determine the best treatment for you.
Anxiety disorders and clinical trials
The FDA encourages people from diverse backgrounds to
participate in clinical trials. If you think an anxiety disorder
clinical trial may be right for you, talk to your health care
provider. You can also search for clinical trials in your area at
www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
For more information on health equity, visit:
www.fda.gov/HealthEquity
The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and
other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, and products that give
off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.

