Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
Anxiety Disorders
Do you often find yourself worrying about everyday issues for no obvious reason?
Are you always waiting for disaster to strike or excessively worried about things
such as health, money, family, work, or school? Do you sometimes have sudden
attacks of anxiety and overwhelming fear that last for several minutes? Are you
afraid of being judged by others? Are you self-conscious in everyday social
situations?
If any of these resonate with you, you may have generalized anxiety disorder
(GAD), panic disorder, or social anxiety disorder. Starting with generalized anxiety
disorder, GAD can make daily life feel like a constant state of worry, fear, and
dread. The good news is GAD is treatable. Learn more about the symptoms of
GAD and how to find help.
What is generalized anxiety disorder?
Occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. Many people may worry about things
such as health, money, or family problems. But people with GAD feel extremely
worried or nervous more frequently about these and other things—even when
there is little or no reason to worry about them. GAD usually involves a persistent
feeling of anxiety or dread that interferes with how you live your life. It is not
the same as occasionally worrying about things or experiencing anxiety due
to stressful life events. People living with GAD experience frequent anxiety for
months, if not years.
GAD develops slowly. It often starts around age 30, although it can occur in
childhood. The disorder is more common in women than in men.
Anxiety Disorders 1

New York State Office of Mental Health
What are the signs and symptoms of generalized
anxiety disorder?
People with GAD may:
• Worry excessively about everyday things
• Have trouble controlling their worries or feelings of nervousness
• Know that they worry much more than they should
• Feel restless and have trouble relaxing
• Have a hard time concentrating
• Startle easily
• Have trouble falling asleep or staying asleep
• Tire easily or feel tired all the time
• Have headaches, muscle aches, stomachaches, or unexplained pains
• Have a hard time swallowing
• Tremble or twitch
• Feel irritable or “on edge”
• Sweat a lot, feel lightheaded, or feel out of breath
• Have to go to the bathroom frequently
Children and teens with GAD often worry excessively about:
• Their performance in activities such as school or sports
• Catastrophes, such as earthquakes or war
• The health of others, such as family members
Adults with GAD are often highly nervous about everyday situations, such as:
• Job security or performance
• Health
• Finances
• The health and well-being of their children or other family members
• Being late
• Completing household chores and other responsibilities
2 Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
Both children and adults with GAD may experience physical symptoms such as
pain, fatigue, or shortness of breath that make it hard to function and that interfere
with daily life.
Symptoms may fluctuate over time and are often worse during times of stress—
for example—with a physical illness, during school exams, or during a family or
relationship conflict.
What causes generalized anxiety disorder?
Risk for GAD can run in families. Several parts of the brain and biological
processes play a key role in fear and anxiety. By learning more about how the
brain and body function in people with anxiety disorders, researchers may be able
to develop better treatments. Researchers have also found that external causes,
such as experiencing a traumatic event or being in a stressful environment, may
put you at higher risk for developing GAD.
How is generalized anxiety disorder treated?
If you think you’re experiencing symptoms of GAD, talk to a health care provider.
After discussing your history, a health care provider may conduct a physical exam
to ensure that an unrelated physical problem is not causing your symptoms.
A health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional, such as
a psychiatrist, psychologist, or clinical social worker. The first step to effective
treatment is to get a diagnosis, usually from a mental health professional.
GAD is generally treated with psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”),
medication, or both. Speak with a health care provider about the best treatment
for you.
Anxiety Disorders 3

New York State Office of Mental Health
Panic Disorder:
When Fear Overwhelms
Do you sometimes have sudden attacks of anxiety and overwhelming fear that last
for several minutes? Maybe your heart pounds, you sweat, and you feel like you
can’t breathe or think clearly. Do these attacks occur at unpredictable times with
no apparent trigger, causing you to worry about the possibility of having another
one at any time?
An untreated panic disorder can affect your quality of life and lead to difficulties
at work or school. The good news is panic disorder is treatable. Learn more about
the symptoms of panic disorder and how to find help.
What is panic disorder?
People with panic disorder have frequent and unexpected panic attacks. These
attacks are characterized by a sudden wave of fear or discomfort or a sense of
losing control even when there is no clear danger or trigger. Not everyone who
experiences a panic attack will develop panic disorder.
Panic attacks often include physical symptoms that might feel like a heart attack,
such as trembling, tingling, or rapid heart rate. Panic attacks can occur at any time.
Many people with panic disorder worry about the possibility of having another
attack and may significantly change their life to avoid having another attack.
Panic attacks can occur as frequently as several times a day or as rarely as a few
times a year.
Panic disorder often begins in the late teens or early adulthood. Women are more
likely than men to develop panic disorder.
4 Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
What are the signs and symptoms of panic disorder?
People with panic disorder may have:
• Sudden and repeated panic attacks of overwhelming anxiety and fear
• A feeling of being out of control, or a fear of death or
impending doom during a panic attack
• An intense worry about when the next panic attack will happen
• A fear or avoidance of places where panic attacks have occurred in the past
• Physical symptoms during a panic attack, such as:
◦ Pounding or racing heart
◦ Sweating
◦ Chills
◦ Trembling
◦ Difficulty breathing
◦ Weakness or dizziness
◦ Tingly or numb hands
◦ Chest pain
◦ Stomach pain or nausea
What causes panic disorder?
Panic disorder sometimes runs in families, but no one knows for sure why some
family members have it while others don’t. Researchers have found that several
parts of the brain and certain biological processes may play a crucial role in fear
and anxiety. Some researchers think panic attacks are like “false alarms” where
our body’s typical survival instincts are active either too often, too strongly, or
some combination of the two. For example, someone with panic disorder might
feel their heart pounding and assume they’re having a heart attack. This may
lead to a vicious cycle, causing a person to experience panic attacks seemingly
out of the blue, the central feature of panic disorder. Researchers are studying
how the brain and body interact in people with panic disorder to create more
specialized treatments. In addition, researchers are looking at the ways stress and
environmental factors play a role in the disorder.
Anxiety Disorders 5

New York State Office of Mental Health
How is panic disorder treated?
If you’re experiencing symptoms of panic disorder, talk to a health care provider.
After discussing your history, a health care provider may conduct a physical exam
to ensure that an unrelated physical problem is not causing your symptoms.
A health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional, such as
a psychiatrist, psychologist, or clinical social worker. The first step to effective
treatment is to get a diagnosis, usually from a mental health professional.
Panic disorder is generally treated with psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk
therapy”), medication, or both. Speak with a health care provider about the best
treatment for you.
6 Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
Social Anxiety Disorder:
More Than Just Shyness
Are you afraid of being judged by others? Are you self-conscious in everyday
social situations? Do you avoid meeting new people due to fear or anxiety? If you
have been feeling this way for at least 6 months and these feelings make it hard
for you to do everyday tasks—such as talking to people at work or school—you
may have social anxiety disorder.
Social anxiety disorder is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged
by others. This fear can affect work, school, and other daily activities. It can even
make it hard to make and keep friends. The good news is social anxiety disorder
is treatable. Learn more about the symptoms of social anxiety disorder and how to
find help.
What is social anxiety disorder?
Social anxiety disorder is a common type of anxiety disorder. A person with social
anxiety disorder feels symptoms of anxiety or fear in situations where they may be
scrutinized, evaluated, or judged by others, such as speaking in public, meeting
new people, dating, being on a job interview, answering a question in class, or
having to talk to a cashier in a store. Doing everyday things, such as eating or
drinking in front of others or using a public restroom, also may cause anxiety or
fear due to concerns about being humiliated, judged, and rejected.
The fear that people with social anxiety disorder have in social situations is so
intense that they feel it is beyond their control. For some people, this fear may
get in the way of going to work, attending school, or doing everyday things. Other
people may be able to accomplish these activities but experience a great deal
of fear or anxiety when they do. People with social anxiety disorder may worry
about engaging in social situations for weeks before they happen. Sometimes,
they end up avoiding places or events that cause distress or generate feelings of
embarrassment.
Some people with the disorder do not have anxiety related to social interactions
but have it during performances instead. They feel symptoms of anxiety in
situations such as giving a speech, competing in a sports game, or playing a
musical instrument on stage.
Anxiety Disorders 7

New York State Office of Mental Health
Social anxiety disorder usually starts during late childhood and may resemble
extreme shyness or avoidance of situations or social interactions. It occurs
more frequently in females than in males, and this gender difference is more
pronounced in adolescents and young adults. Without treatment, social anxiety
disorder can last for many years, or even a lifetime.
What are the signs and symptoms of
social anxiety disorder?
When having to perform in front of or be around others, people with social anxiety
disorder may:
• Blush, sweat, or tremble
• Have a rapid heart rate
• Feel their “mind going blank,” or feel sick to their stomach
• Have a rigid body posture, or speak with an overly soft voice
• Find it difficult to make eye contact, be around people they don’t know, or talk
to people in social situations, even when they want to
• Feel self-consciousness or fear that people will judge them negatively
• Avoid places where there are other people
What causes social anxiety disorder?
Risk for social anxiety disorder may run in families, but no one knows for sure
why some family members have it while others don’t. Researchers have found
that several parts of the brain are involved in fear and anxiety and that genetics
influences how these areas function. By studying how the brain and body interact
in people with social anxiety disorder, researchers may be able to create more
targeted treatments. In addition, researchers are looking at the ways stress and
environmental factors play a role in the disorder.
8 Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
How is social anxiety disorder treated?
If you’re concerned you may have symptoms of social anxiety disorder, talk to
a health care provider. After discussing your history, a health care provider may
conduct a physical exam to ensure that an unrelated physical problem is not
causing your symptoms. A health care provider may refer you to a mental health
professional, such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, or clinical social worker. The
first step to effective treatment is to get a diagnosis, usually from a mental health
professional.
Social anxiety disorder is generally treated with psychotherapy (sometimes called
“talk therapy”), medication, or both. Speak with a health care provider about the
best treatment for you.
Treatments and Therapies for Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both.
Psychotherapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a research-supported type of psychotherapy,
is commonly used to treat anxiety disorders. CBT teaches you different ways
of thinking, behaving, and reacting to situations to help you feel less anxious
and fearful. CBT also can help you learn and practice social skills, which is very
important for treating anxiety disorders. CBT has been well studied and is the gold
standard for psychotherapy.
Exposure therapy is a CBT method that focuses on progressively confronting
the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help you engage in activities you
have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation
exercises. CBT delivered in a group therapy format also can offer unique benefits
for anxiety disorders.
Another treatment option for anxiety disorders is acceptance and commitment
therapy (ACT). ACT takes a different approach than CBT to negative thoughts and
uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce your discomfort
and anxiety. Compared to CBT, ACT is a newer form of psychotherapy treatment,
so less data are available on its effectiveness. However, different therapies work
for different types of people, so it can be helpful to discuss what form of therapy
may be right for you with a mental health professional.
Anxiety Disorders 9

New York State Office of Mental Health
Medication
Health care providers may prescribe medication to treat anxiety disorders.
Different types of medication can be effective in treating these disorders,
including:
• Antidepressants, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
• Beta-blockers
• Anti-anxiety medications, such as benzodiazepines
SSRI and SNRI antidepressants are commonly used to treat depression, but they
also can help treat the symptoms of anxiety disorders. They may take several
weeks to start working. Antidepressants may also cause side effects, such as
headaches, nausea, or difficulty sleeping. These side effects are usually not
severe, especially if the dose starts off low and is increased slowly over time. Talk
to your health care provider about any side effects that you may experience.
Beta-blockers can help control some of the physical symptoms of social anxiety
disorder, such as rapid heart rate, sweating, and tremors. Beta-blockers are
commonly the medication of choice for the “performance anxiety” type of social
anxiety disorder.
Benzodiazepines, which are anti-anxiety sedative medications, are powerful
and begin working right away to reduce anxious feelings. These medications
can be very effective in rapidly decreasing anxiety, but some people build up a
tolerance to them and need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some
people even become dependent on them. Therefore, a health care provider may
prescribe them only for brief periods of time if you need them.
Both psychotherapy and medication can take some time to work. Many people
try more than one medication before finding the best one for them. A health
care provider can work with you to find the best medication, dose, and duration
of treatment for you. People with social anxiety disorder usually obtain the best
results with a combination of medication and CBT or other psychotherapies.
10 Anxiety Disorders

New York State Office of Mental Health
Support Groups
Many people with anxiety find support groups helpful. In a group of people who
all have an anxiety disorder, you can receive unbiased, honest feedback about
how others in the group see you. This way, you can learn that your thoughts
about judgment and rejection are not true or are distorted. You also can learn how
others with anxiety disorders approach and overcome the fears.
Support groups are available both in person and online. However, any advice you
receive from a support group member should be used cautiously and does not
replace treatment recommendations from a health care provider.
Both psychotherapy and medication can take some time to work. A healthy lifestyle
also can help combat anxiety. Make sure to get enough sleep and exercise, eat a
healthy diet, and turn to family and friends who you trust for support.
How can I support myself and others with anxiety
disorders?
Educate Yourself
A good way to help yourself or a loved one who may be struggling with an anxiety
disorder is to seek information. Research the warning signs, learn about treatment
options, and keep up to date with current research.
Communicate
If you are experiencing anxiety disorder symptoms, have an honest conversation
about how you’re feeling with someone you trust. If you think that a friend or
family member may be struggling with an anxiety disorder, set aside a time to talk
with them to express your concern and reassure them of your support.
Know When to Seek Help
If your anxiety, or the anxiety of a loved one, starts to cause problems in everyday
life—such as avoiding social situations at school, at work, or with friends and
family—it’s time to seek professional help. Talk to a health care provider about
your mental health.
Anxiety Disorders 11

New York State Office of Mental Health
Finding Help
New York State Mental Health Program Directory
The Mental Health Program Directory provides information on all programs in New
York State that are operated, licensed or funded by the State Office of Mental
Health (OMH). This site includes three search options: Basic Search, Advanced
Search, and Full Directory. Definitions for all programs are available under the
Support tab, along with directory help and information on program data collection.
Find services close to you at: https://my.omh.ny.gov/bi/pd/saw.dll?PortalPages#report
Mental Health Treatment Program Locator
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and
programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health
Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to
persons with mental illness.
Find a facility in your state at: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/
For Immediate Help
If you are in crisis, experiencing emotional distress, or worried about someone
you know:
• Call or text the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org/chat.
You can also text the Crisis Text Line (GOT5 to 741741). These services are
available 24/7 to anyone and are completely confidential.
If you are thinking about harming yourself or thinking about suicide:
• Tell someone who can help right away
• Call your licensed mental health professional if you are already working with one
• Call your doctor
• Go to the nearest hospital emergency department
If a loved one is considering suicide:
• Do not leave them alone
• Try to get your loved one to seek immediate help from a doctor or the nearest
hospital emergency room, or call 988
• Remove access to firearms, medications or other potential tools for suicide
12 Anxiety Disorders

The New York State Office of Mental Health thanks the National Institute
of Mental Health for providing the information contained in this booklet.
2023

In Crisis?
For questions or complaints
We’ve got time to listen.
regarding mental health services
anywhere in New York State Text Got5 to 741741
please contact:
New York State
Office of Mental Health
Customer Relations
44 Holland Avenue
Albany, NY 12229 Call/Text 988 or
(800) 597-8481 (toll-free) Chat at 988lifeline.org
Are you in crisis, experiencing
emotional distress, or worried
For information about mental health about someone you know?
services in your community, contact
24 hrs/day, 7 days/wk
the New York State Office of Mental
Health regional office nearest you:
Central New York Field Office Connect with OMH
545 Cedar Street, 2nd Floor
Syracuse, NY 13210-2319
(315) 426-3930
www.facebook.com/nysomh
Hudson River Field Office
10 Ross Circle, Suite 5N
Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
(845) 454-8229 www.twitter.com/nysomh
@nysomh
Long Island Field Office
998 Crooked Hill Road
Building #45-3
www.youtube.com/user/nysomh
West Brentwood, NY 11717-1087
(631) 761-2508
New York City Field Office
330 Fifth Avenue, 9th Floor
New York, NY 10001-3101
(212) 330-1650 For additional information regarding
this publication please contact:
Western New York Field Office
NYS OMH Community Outreach
737 Delaware Avenue, Suite 200
and Public Education Office
Buffalo, NY 14209 44 Holland Avenue
(716) 533-4075 Albany, NY 12229
(800) 597-8481 (toll free)
www.omh.ny.gov

