What is anxiety?
Anxiety triggers the body’s fight or flight response: your
heart beats faster, more blood flows to the muscles, your
breathing becomes heavier, and your muscles tense up.
These changes prepare us to respond quickly to threats.
But for people with an anxiety disorder, these feelings can
become overwhelming and interfere with everyday life.
Anxiety disorders are the most common form of mental
illness in the United States. They can affect people of
all ages, backgrounds, and walks of life. Common types
include generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety
disorder, panic disorder, and specific phobias.
Who is at risk?
Anyone can develop an anxiety disorder, but some
risk factors make developing one more likely. These
include a family history of anxiety disorders or mental
illness, experiencing traumatic or stressful events, and
underlying medical conditions.
8 Volume 18, Issue 3 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
SEGAMI
YTTEG
:STIDERC
EGAMI
ANXIETY:
What you need to know
Stressful or traumatic events and family history could increase your risk.
Anxiety is a natural part of life, and most of us experience it at some point. You might feel nervous, jittery, or on edge before
taking a test, crossing a busy street, or making an important life decision. If you experience anxiety without a reason or
more often or severely than expected, it may signal an anxiety disorder.
* This article was originally published in November 2019. It was updated in August 2023 to reflect new information and developments.
What are the symptoms?
Everyone feels anxiety differently. Some common
symptoms include:
ɠ Physical symptoms such as increased heart rate, rapid
breathing, dizziness, shortness of breath, and headaches
ɠ Cognitive and emotional symptoms such as
irritability, difficulty concentrating, and feeling restless,
worried, or unable to sit still
ɠ Changes in behavior such as avoiding places,
situations, and everyday activities that trigger anxiety
or taking extreme steps to reduce or eliminate what is
causing the anxiety
How are anxiety disorders diagnosed?
Your health care provider will ask you questions about your
symptoms and medical history. They may also do a physical
examination and run tests to rule out any medical conditions
that could be causing your anxiety. If necessary, they can
refer you to a mental health specialist such as a psychologist,
psychiatrist, or therapist.

ANXIETY
Volume 18, Issue 3 magazine.medlineplus. gov 9
SEGAMI
YTTEG
:STIDERC
EGAMI
Other strategies can help you manage anxiety and make
treatment more effective. These include exercise, relaxation
techniques such as deep breathing or meditation, and lifestyle
changes such as limiting caffeine and alcohol and getting
enough sleep.
A strong social support system is also important, whether
it's through talking to friends and family or joining a
support group.
Getting help
Remember, feeling anxious sometimes is normal. But if
your symptoms last a long time, get worse, or interfere with your
FAST FACT
day-to-day life, it may be a sign of an anxiety disorder. If you or
More than 31% of U.S. adults experience someone you know is experiencing symptoms of anxiety disorders,
reach out to a health care provider. Help is available, and you don't
an anxiety disorder at some time in their lives.
have to face your anxiety alone.
SOURCE: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH
More NIH resources
Learn more about anxiety and get helpful tips for managing it.
Check out these videos from the National Institute of
How are anxiety disorders treated?
Mental Health.
The good news is that anxiety is treatable. Different
ɠ NIMH Expert Dr. Krystal Lewis Discusses Managing
strategies to help manage your anxiety may involve
Stress & Anxiety
psychotherapy, medication, or both.
ɠ GREAT: Helpful Practices to Manage Stress and Anxiety
Psychotherapy methods may include:
ɠ Mental Health Minute: Anxiety Disorders in Adults T
ɠ Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, which
teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving,
and reacting to situations to help them feel less
anxious or afraid
ɠ Exposure therapy, a type of CBT that helps people
confront fears so they can participate in activities they
have avoided
ɠ Acceptance and commitment therapy, which uses
strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to help
people live fulfilling lives despite their anxiety
Medication doesn't cure anxiety, but it can help some people
manage their symptoms. Some may include:
ɠ Anti-anxiety medications, which may reduce the
symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear
and worry
ɠ Antidepressants, which can improve the way
the brain uses certain chemicals that control mood
or stress
ɠ Beta blockers, which can relieve physical symptoms
of anxiety such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, Physical symptoms can include increased heart rate,
and blushing dizziness, and shortness of breath.

