Q: What should I do if someone I moody, sad, Q: Are there different types of
Feeling
know is considering suicide? depression?
A: If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or
Depression or grouchy?
Who A: Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major
depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual
her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from doesn’t once in a while?
feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-
his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest
hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have College College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic
to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You and As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some
people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective
can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes,
disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to
1-800-273-TALK (8255). meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large
Students their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn
setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
usually pass with a little time. health/topics/depression/index.shtml.
Q: Where can I learn more
about depression and other
But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least
mental health issues? Q: What are the signs and
2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression
A: The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website is the most common health problem for college students.1 You symptoms of depression?
(http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health should know: A: If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and
disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major
Ê Depression is a medical illness.
the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. (sometimes called “clinical”) depression:
Ê Depression can be treated.
This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on
Ê Persistent sad, anxious, or “empty” mood
any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones. Ê Early treatment is best.
Ê Feelings of hopelessness, pessimism
Ê Most colleges offer free or low-cost mental health
You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube Ê Feelings of guilt, worthlessness, helplessness
(https://www.youtube.com/user/NIMHgov), Facebook, Google+, services to students. Ê Loss of interest or pleasure in hobbies and activities
and LinkedIn. Ê Decreased energy, fatigue, being “slowed down”
Ê Difficulty concentrating, remembering, making decisions
NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on 1 Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population:
Ê Difficulty sleeping, early-morning awakening, or oversleeping
various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming Answers to A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21-42. doi:10.1016/j.
Ê Appetite and/or unwanted weight changes
events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov). apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0883941711000379. Ê Thoughts of death or suicide; suicide attempts
college students’ Ê Restlessness, irritability
Ê Persistent physical symptoms, such as muscle pain or headaches.
frequently asked Q: What is depression?
Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people
experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these
National Institute questions about A: Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts
of Mental Health physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with
that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself— you should seek help
depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose
depression immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.
interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your
NIH Publication No. 15-4266 daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is
not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away.

Q: What are “co-occurring” q: How is depression treated have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” Ê Try to get out with friends and try fun things that help you express yourself.
the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and As you recover from depression, you may find that even if you don’t feel like
disorders?
A: Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a going out with friends, if you push yourself to do so, you’ll be able to enjoy
A: Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again. yourself more than you thought.
anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other therapy and medication. Early treatment is best.
Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed
medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain
medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an in college and after graduation.
medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause Q: What is talk therapy?
antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To
side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very
avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for Q: What are the warning signs
sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated A: A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or
some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or
with depression for most users. counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You for suicide?
comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.
can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You A: Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are
Q: If I think I may have depression, can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for
where can I get help? life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to concern.
to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic
A: If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your Ê Talking about wanting to die or to kill oneself
insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one
ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression Ê Looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching online or buying a gun
Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms
can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by Ê Talking about feeling hopeless or having no reason to live
young adults deal with depression. without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.
itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re Ê Talking about feeling trapped or in unbearable pain
feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re These include: Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/ Ê Talking about being a burden to others and that others would be better off
busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression Ê Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, which focuses on thoughts, behaviors, health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml. if one was gone
may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the and feelings related to depression Ê Increasing the use of alcohol or drugs
academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first Ê Interpersonal psychotherapy, or IPT, which focuses on working on relationships Q: What else can I do? Ê Acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly
place. It can also lead to “self- medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own Ê Dialectical behavior therapy, or DBT, which is especially useful when Ê Giving away prized possessions
serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and depression is accompanied by self-destructive or self-harming behavior. A: Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by Ê Sleeping too little or too much
being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better
Ê Withdrawing or feeling isolated
having unsafe sex. All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time. Ê Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center Ê Daily exercise, spending time outside in nature and in the sun, and eating Ê Displaying extreme mood swings.
student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops healthy foods can also help you feel better.
If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a and outreach programs to support you. Ê Get enough sleep. Try to have consistent sleep habits and avoid all-night Q: What should I do if I am
doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/ study sessions.
considering suicide?
provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off- psychotherapies. Ê Your counselor may teach you how to be aware of your feelings and teach
A: If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24
campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make you relaxation techniques. Use these when you start feeling down or upset.
sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression. Q: What medications Ê Avoid using drugs and at least minimize, if not totally avoid, alcohol. hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National
Ê Break up large tasks into small ones, and do what you can as you can; try Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for
If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can treat depression? yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can
not to do too many things at once.
discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a A: If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he Ê Try to spend time with supportive family members or friends, and take also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.
psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a
or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants advantage of campus resources, such as student support groups. Talking
thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.
that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends with your parents, guardian, or other students who listen and care about
If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about you gives you support.
as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or
911, or go to the nearest emergency room.

