Suicide
Prevention
RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Suicide
Prevention
RESOURCE FOR ACTION

SUGGESTED CITATION:
CDC. (2022). Suicide Prevention Resource for Action: A
Compilation of the Best Available Evidence. Atlanta, GA:
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Suicide
Prevention
RESOURCE FOR ACTION
A Compilation of the Best Available Evidence
2022
Division of Injury Prevention
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Rochelle P. Walensky, MD, MPH
DIRECTOR
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control
Christopher M. Jones, PharmD, DrPH, MPH
ACTING DIRECTOR
Division of Injury Prevention
Judith R. Qualters, PhD, MPH
DIRECTOR

6

Contents
Overview ......................................................................10
About the Suicide Prevention Resource for Action ..............11
Preventing Suicide Is a Priority .......................................12
Contextual and Cross-Cutting Themes .............................17
Assessing the Evidence ................................................20
Strengthen Economic Supports .........................................22
Create Protective Environments ........................................28
Improve Access and Delivery of Suicide Care ........................36
Promote Healthy Connections ...........................................42
Teach Coping and Problem-Solving Skills .............................48
Identify and Support People at Risk ....................................56
Lessen Harms and Prevent Future Risk ...............................68
Collaboration and Partnerships .........................................74
Monitoring and Evaluation ...............................................78
Conclusion ....................................................................82
References ....................................................................84
Appendix: Summary of Strategies and
Approaches to Prevent Suicide ........................................100

Contributors
The 2022 Suicide Prevention Resource for Action (Prevention Resource, for short) is an update to the 2017 Preventing
Suicide: A Technical Package of Policy, Programs, and Practices. It was a collaborative effort between the National
Center for Injury Prevention and Control/Division of Injury Prevention and the Prevention Institute (Cooperative
Agreement #NU38OT000305). We thank the following individuals who contributed to the development or design
of this new Prevention Resource (listed in alphabetical order):
2022 Update Contributors
Adam Miller, PhD, RTI International
Alexis Captanian, MUP, Prevention Institute
Alisha Somji, MPH, Prevention Institute
Anna Yaros, PhD, RTI International
Becky Durocher, BA, RTI International
Carmen Goman, PhD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Deb Stone, ScD, MSW, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Elizabeth Gaylor, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Jing Wang, MD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
John Richardson, PhD, RTI International
Julie Seibert, PhD, RTI International
Karin Mack, PhD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Kesha Hudson, PhD, RTI International
Laura Welder, DrPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Leslie Dorigo, MA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Lisa Hines, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Melissa Brown, DrPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Natalie Lennon, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Nia West-Bey, PhD, Center for Law and Social Policy
Paul Geiger, PhD, RTI International
Sara Hairgrove, BA, RTI International
Sheila Savannah, MA, Prevention Institute
2017 Authors
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Deb Stone, ScD, MSW, MPH
Kristin Holland, PhD, MPH
Brad Bartholow, PhD
Alex Crosby, MD, MPH
Shane Davis, PhD
Natalie Wilkins, PhD
8

2022 External Reviewers*
Adam Chu, Education Development Center, Inc., Jerry Tello, National Compadres Network
Suicide Prevention Resource Center and Zero
Jill Harkavy-Friedman, American Foundation for
Suicide Institute
Suicide Prevention
Allison Foust, Utah Department of Human Services
Joan Asarnow, UCLA Youth Stress & Mood Program
Anna Godøy, Center on Wage and Employment and SAMHSA Center for Trauma-Informed
Dynamics, Institute for Research on Labor and Adolescent Suicide, Self-Harm & Substance Abuse
Employment, University of California, Berkeley Treatment & Prevention
Anthony Spirito, Alpert Medical School of Brown Joel Dubenitz, Division of Behavioral Health Policy,
University Office of Behavioral Health, Disability, and Aging
Policy, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
Benjamin F. Miller, Well Being Trust
and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and
Brian Ahmedani, Center for Health Policy & Health Human Services
Services Research, Behavioral Health Services,
Kurt Michael, Appalachian State University and
Henry Ford Health System
Journal of Rural Mental Health
Carol Ruddell, Utah Division of Substance Abuse and
Lisa Horowitz, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH
Mental Health
Nzinga Khalid, Prevention Institute
Colleen Carr, Education Development Center, Inc.,
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Peter Wyman, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Division, University of Rochester School of Medicine
Dana Richardson, Community Health Improvement
Partners / San Diego County Suicide Prevention Quinn R. Lewandowski, University of Nebraska Public
Council Policy Center, Nebraska State Suicide Prevention
Coalition
David Jobes, Suicide Prevention Laboratory, The
Catholic University of America Richard McKeon, Suicide Prevention Branch,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Doreen Marshall, American Foundation for Suicide
Administration
Prevention
Ruben Cantu, Prevention Institute
Elaine de Mello, National Alliance on Mental Illness
New Hampshire Shelina Davis, Louisiana Public Health Institute
Elaine Frank, Dartmouth College Shelli Stephens-Stidham, Safe States Alliance
Elly Stout, Education Development Center, Inc., Suicide Stephen O’Connor, Suicide Prevention Research
Prevention Resource Center Program, Division of Services and Intervention
Research, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH
Isha Weerasinghe, Center for Law and Social Policy
Jamie Freeny, Mental Health America of Greater
Houston * Theexpertsabovearelistedwiththeiraffiliationsatthe
Jei Africa, Behavioral Health and Recovery Services, time this document was reviewed.
Marin County
Jennifer Hughes, Center for Depression Research and
Clinical Care, UT Southwestern Medical Center
9

Overview

Suicide Can Be Prevented
Like most public health problems, suicide is preventable.1-3 The National Center
for Injury Prevention and Control’s vision of “No lives lost to suicide” relies on
implementing a comprehensive public health approach to prevention. These
efforts rely on timely data and evidence, prompting an update of the 2017
Preventing Suicide: A Technical Package of Policy, Programs, and Practices. This
2022 version, now called the Suicide Prevention Resource for Action (or Prevention
Resource, for short), weaves in new evidence that can be implemented and
adapted for the community-specific context.
About the Suicide Prevention
Resource for Action
This resource is
intended to help
The Suicide Prevention Resource for Action maintains the features of the 2017
Preventing Suicide: A Technical Package of Policy, Programs, and Practices. It lays
communities
out a core set of strategies to achieve and sustain substantial reductions in a
and states learn
specific risk factor or outcome, such as suicide.4 This resource is intended to
about the best help communities and states learn about the best available evidence for suicide
prevention. Communities and states can pair this information with their local
available evidence
context and experience to prioritize prevention activities. This resource has three
for suicide components. The first component is the strategy or the preventive actions to
achieve the goal of preventing suicide. The second component is the approach
prevention.
or the specific ways to advance the strategy. This can be accomplished through
policy, programs, and practices, which are the third component and are based on
the evidence for each of the approaches in preventing suicide or its associated
risk factors.
This Prevention Resource represents a select group of strategies based on the
best available evidence to help communities and states focus on prevention
activities with the greatest potential to prevent suicide. These strategies include:
Strengthen economic supports
Create protective environments
Improve access and delivery of suicide care
Promote healthy connections
Teach coping and problem-solving skills
Identify and support people at risk
Lessen harms and prevent future risk
OVERVIEW 11

Preventing Suicide
government, among others, can drive significant
Is a Priority improvements in suicide prevention.
Suicide is highly prevalent
Suicide is a critical public health problem in the
United States (U.S.).5 Suicide presents a major challenge to public health in
the U.S. and worldwide. It contributes to premature
death, morbidity, lost productivity, and healthcare
suicide is a death caused by injuring oneself
costs.1,3 Suicide was responsible for nearly 46,000
with the intent to die.
deaths in the U.S. in 2020.7 This is about 1 suicide
suicide attempt is defined as a nonfatal act every 11 minutes.8 Suicide is a leading cause of death
when someone harms themselves with any for people ages 10–64 years.9 Suicide rates rose 30%
intent to end their life but does not die as a from 2000 to 2020, including small declines in 2019
result of their actions. A suicide attempt may and 2020.7,10
or may not result in injury.
Suicide rates vary by age, race/ethnicity, and other
socio-demographic characteristics. In 2020, suicide
In recent years, the urgency to prevent suicide has was the second leading cause of death for people
heightened as millions of Americans were impacted ages 10–14 years and 25–34 years, the third leading
by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cause for people ages 15–24 years, the fourth
pandemic and the overdose epidemic. These two leading cause for people ages 34–44 years, the
major crises have taken a mental, emotional, seventh leading cause for people ages 45–54 years,
physical, and economic toll on individuals, families, and the ninth leading cause for people ages 55–64
and communities.2 years.9 Non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska
Native (AI/AN) people have the highest suicide
Suicide is not caused by any single factor and suicide
rates, followed by non-Hispanic White people.10
prevention will not be achieved by any single strategy
Racism, historical trauma, and long-lasting inequities
or approach.1,2,6 The public health strategies in this
such as disproportionate exposure to poverty
resource focus on preventing the risk of suicide in the
have contributed to higher suicide rates among
first place and lessening the immediate and long-term
non-Hispanic AI/AN youth and other groups who
harms of suicidal behavior by helping those in times
have been marginalized.11
of crisis get the services and support they need. These
strategies support the goals and objectives of the Some other population groups disproportionately
National Strategy for Suicide Prevention, The Surgeon impacted by higher-than-average suicide rates include
General’s Call to Action to Implement the National veterans, people who live in rural areas, and workers
Strategy for Suicide Prevention, the Action Alliance’s in certain industries and occupations.12-14 Transition
priority to strengthen community-based prevention, periods are also associated with higher risk of suicide.
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s This includes transitions from work into retirement,
(CDC) comprehensive suicide prevention approach. from active-duty military status to civilian status,
from high school to college, and between levels of
Partnering across sectors to leverage expertise and
healthcare such as from an inpatient psychiatric
implementing multiple strategies and approaches
hospitalization to outpatient care.15-19
that are tailored to cultural needs and strengths
can address the multiple factors associated with Suicides reflect only a portion of the problem.20
suicide. Commitment, cooperation, and leadership Substantially more people are hospitalized or treated
from public health, mental health, education, justice, in ambulatory settings like emergency departments
healthcare, social services, business, labor, and for nonfatal self-harm such as suicide attempts or
12 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Suicide is not caused by any
single factor and suicide prevention
will not be achieved by any single
strategy or approach.
2019, suicide attempts were more prevalent among
students who reported having sex with persons of
the same sex or with both sexes (30%) and students
not treated at all.20 In 2020, 12.2 million American
who identified as lesbian, gay, or bisexual (23%).23
adults seriously thought about suicide, 3.2 million
planned a suicide, and 1.2 million attempted suicide.21
Suicide is associated with multiple risk
According to recent research, between 1991 and
and protective factors
2017, trends in suicidal ideation and planning among
Research indicates that suicide risk varies as a result
high school students decreased among all sex and
of the number and intensity of key risk and
racial and ethnic groups except non-Hispanic students
protective factors experienced.25 Suicide occurs
of multiple races.22 Another recent study found that
in response to multiple biological, psychological,
trends in suicide attempts among adolescents from
interpersonal, environmental, and societal influences
2009-2019 increased overall, and Black students,
that interact with one another, often over time.3,26,27
both male and female, had the highest prevalence
The social-ecological model encompasses multiple
estimates for suicide attempts.23 Disparities in access
levels of focus and considers the complex interplay
to mental health treatment and other factors such
between individual, relationship, community, and
as poverty, historical trauma, and adverse childhood
societal factors. Characteristics that may increase the
experiences (ACEs) may contribute to differences
likelihood of suicide across populations include:
in suicide attempt rates among Black youth.22 In
addition, young people who identify as lesbian, gay,
or bisexual have a higher rate of suicidal ideation as
compared to their peers who identify as straight. In
OVERVIEW 13

Belonging, safety, dignity, and
hope can support resilience
and healing for individuals
and communities, and protect
S ocietal risk factors: Stigma associated with
against suicide.
help-seeking and mental illness, easy access to
lethal means of suicide among people at risk,
unsafe media portrayals of suicide
The presence of risk factors does not predict suicide
Individual risk factors: Previous suicide attempt, or suicide attempts for any given person. Most
history of depression and other mental illnesses, individuals who experience risk factors or who
serious illness such as chronic pain, criminal/legal attempt suicide do not die by suicide. The cumulative
problems, job/financial problems or loss, impulsive
effect of several risk factors may serve to increase
or aggressive tendencies, substance misuse, current
an individual’s vulnerability to suicidal behaviors.
or prior history of adverse childhood experiences,
The relevance of any given risk factor can vary by
sense of hopelessness, violence victimization and/or
age, race, sex, sexual orientation, residential
perpetration
geography, and socio-cultural and economic
R elationship risk factors: Bullying, family/loved status.3,27,28
one’s history of suicide, loss of relationships, high
Protective factors, or those influences that buffer
conflict or violent relationships, social isolation
against the risk for suicide and promote resilience,
C ommunity risk factors: Lack of access to
can also be found across the levels of the social-
healthcare, suicide cluster in the community, stress
ecological model. Protective factors that improve
of acculturation, community violence, historical
resilience include: 3,27,28
trauma, discrimination
14 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

I ndividual protective factors: Effective coping these related issues may also prove beneficial in
and problem-solving skills, reasons for living (for preventing suicide.42-44 Similarly, many protective
example, family, friends, pets, etc.), strong sense of factors overlap and may be shared. Connectedness to
cultural identity one’s community,45 school,46 family,47 caring adults,48,49
R elationship protective factors: Support from and pro-social peers50 can enhance resilience and help
partners, friends, and family, feeling connected reduce risk for suicide and different forms of violence.
to others
Substance use disorders and suicide risk are
C ommunity protective factors: Feeling connected
associated.51,52 For example, in a study using the
to school, community, and other social institutions,
National Death Index data and treatment data from
availability of consistent and high quality physical
electronic health records of 5 million veterans,
and behavioral healthcare
researchers found diagnosis of substance use
S ocietal protective factors: Reduced access to
disorder was associated with increased suicide risk.53
lethal means of suicide among people at risk,
Drinking alcohol at an early age, heavy drinking, and
cultural, religious, or moral objections to suicide
mild to severe alcohol use disorder can all lead to
These protective factors can either counter a increases in suicidal ideation.54 The relationship is
specific risk factor or buffer against multiple risks also cyclical. Losing a loved one to overdose or suicide
associated with suicide. Belonging, safety, dignity, during childhood can increase the risk for overdose
and hope can support resilience and healing or suicide later in life.55
for individuals and communities, and protect
against suicide.29 Suicide has far-reaching impacts
Suicide and suicide attempts can contribute to lasting
Suicide, ACEs, and substance use
impacts on individuals, families, and communities.56-59
are connected
Studies estimate that the number of individuals
Exposure to violence is associated with increased risk impacted by a single suicide attempt ranges from
of depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, 135–456 individuals.60,61 Other studies have found that
suicide attempts, and suicide. Types of violence could 48–58% of adults in the U.S. know at least one person
include child abuse and neglect, bullying, peer violence, over their lifetime who died by suicide.61,62 Research
dating violence, sexual violence, and intimate partner also indicates that people with lived experience, such
violence.30-37 ACEs, such as physical, sexual, and as having attempted suicide, having suicidal thoughts,
emotional abuse, or living in homes with violence, or having experienced the loss of a friend or family
mental illnesses, or substance misuse, are also member to suicide, may suffer long-term health and
associated with increased risk for suicide attempts and mental health consequences, such as anger, guilt, and
suicide.33,38 The effects of ACEs are often cumulative. physical impairment.63-66 Survivors of a loved one’s
Experiencing more ACEs is associated with greater risk suicide may experience ongoing pain and suffering
for future poor outcomes when compared to people including complicated grief,67-69 stigma, depression,
with fewer ACEs.39 anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and increased
risk of suicidal ideation and suicide.64,70-72 The economic
Unemployment, poverty, and lower educational
toll of suicide on society is immense as well. Suicide
attainment are overlapping risk factors for ACEs,
cost the U.S. more than $460 billion and self-harm
substance misuse, and multiple forms of violence
$26 billion in 2019.73,74
and suicide,40,41 which suggests that efforts to prevent
OVERVIEW 15

STRATEGIES AND APPROACHES
to achieve and sustain substantial reductions in suicide
STRATEGY APPROACH
1 S trengthen • Improve household financial security
Economic Supports • Stabilize housing
• Reduce access to lethal means among persons
at risk of suicide
2 Create Protective
• Create healthy organizational policies and culture
Environments
• Reduce substance use through community-based
policies and practices
• Cover mental health conditions in health
3 Improve Access
insurance policies
and Delivery of • Increase provider availability in underserved areas
Suicide Care • Provide rapid and remote access to help
• Create safer suicide care through systems change
4 Promote Healthy • Promote healthy peer norms
Connections • Engage community members in shared activities
5 Teach Coping and • Support social-emotional learning programs
• Teach parenting skills to improve family relationships
Problem-Solving Skills
• Support resilience through education programs
• Train gatekeepers
6 Identify and Support • Respond to crises
People at Risk • Plan for safety and follow-up after an attempt
• Provide therapeutic approaches
7 Lessen Harms and • Intervene after a suicide (postvention)
Prevent Future Risk • Report and message about suicide safely
16 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Comprehensive action
Contextual and
The overarching goal of this resource is to stress
Cross-Cutting Themes
the importance of comprehensive prevention
efforts. Comprehensive suicide prevention includes
preventing suicide risk, supporting those at increased
Synergistic strategies and approaches
risk of suicide, preventing reattempts, and supporting
The strategies and approaches in this resource can survivors of suicide loss. Programs, practices, and
have complementary and synergistic impacts. They policies that span multiple sectors and influence
are intended to impact community and societal levels multiple levels of the social ecology are more likely to
as well as individual and relationship levels. They have a greater effect on the overall burden of suicide.
can work in combination and reinforce each other
to prevent suicide (see summary box at left). Assessing local context, needs,
and strengths
Each strategy has a specific focus, but the strategies
are not mutually exclusive. For instance, some The effectiveness of the programs, policies, and
programs that teach skills like emotional regulation practices identified here will depend on how well they
and conflict resolution fall under the Teach Coping are implemented and the level of participation from
and Problem-Solving Skills strategy but also include partners and communities. Practitioners in the field
components to change peer norms, which falls under and community members are valuable resources for
the Promote Healthy Connections strategy. However, the assessing needs and strengths and making decisions
primary focus of these programs is to provide children about the combination of approaches that are best
and youth with coping and problem-solving skills suited to their community context. Community
to resolve problems in relationships, in school, and members can also advance health equity by including
with peers and to help youth address other negative and amplifying the voices of underserved populations
influences such as substance use. and assisting with cultural adaptations of prevention
OVERVIEW 17

Practitioners in the field and
community members are
valuable resources for assessing
needs and strengths and making
program effects. Implementation guidance to assist
decisions.
practitioners, organizations, and communities is
available through the Action Alliance’s Transforming
Communities: Key Elements for the Implementation of
strategies and approaches that may increase
Comprehensive Community-Based Suicide Prevention
acceptability and effectiveness. Multiple strategies
and the Suicide Prevention Resource Center.78,79 The
and approaches tailored to the social, economic,
Prevention Institute’s Suicide Prevention Modules80
cultural, and environmental context will increase the
offer specific guidance for suicide prevention planning
likelihood of developing individual and community
in the context of catastrophic events.
resilience and removing barriers to supportive and
effective care.1,2 Collaboration
Data-driven strategic planning with engagement from A comprehensive approach to suicide prevention
multi-sectoral partners can help communities with includes multi-sectoral partnerships as no agency
decision-making.75-77 This planning process guides its or sector can accomplish suicide prevention on its
members through activities designed to address the own. Such partnerships include allies in the public
range of risk and protective factors specific to the and private sectors like public health, mental health,
community using programs, practices, and policies healthcare, education, employment/labor, housing,
with the best available evidence. Strategic planning social services, business, and others. Public health
can also be used to monitor implementation, track agencies are well-positioned to bring leadership and
outcomes, and adjust as indicated by the data. resources to implement strategies. The role of other
The community’s readiness to plan, implement, sectors in implementation is described in the section
and evaluate prevention efforts can also influence on Collaboration and Partnerships.
18 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

The COVID-19 Pandemic
and Suicide Prevention
The COVID-19 pandemic created
unprecedented challenges for communities.
Some experts noted that COVID-19 created
the “perfect storm” for increased suicide
risk due to the consequences of physical/
social distancing, increases in economic
stressors, decreased access to mental health
treatment, and decreased access to typical
routines and support systems.81-83 Prior
public health crises were associated with
increased suicide risk among some populations. Studies suggest increased suicide rates during the
1918–1920 influenza pandemic in the U.S. and in Taiwan and among older adults in Hong Kong during
the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome pandemic.84-86
At the time of this writing (while the world is deeply embedded in the COVID-19 pandemic), it is too
early to assess the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on suicide. While overall suicide rates declined
in 2019 and 2020, they increased among some populations.7 Studies showed increases in mental
distress and substance use for some populations during the pandemic.87-89 A CDC study conducted in
June 2020 indicated that U.S. adults reported significant mental health distress related to COVID-19.87
The study also showed that specific sub-populations, including younger adults, people from racial
and ethnic minority groups, essential workers, and unpaid adult caregivers, reported experiencing
disproportionately worse mental health outcomes, increased substance use, and increased suicidal
ideation. Early evidence among older adults paints a different picture. A qualitative study of older
adults with pre-existing depression showed no difference in depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation
symptom scores. Instead, older adults exhibited resilience and increased use of technology to connect
virtually with social supports.90
Organizations are developing strategies to respond to the potential risk presented by COVID-19. For
example, telehealth is being used to identify, assess, and treat individuals who are at risk for suicide.
Evidence-based suicide prevention programs, such as Collaborative Assessment and Management of
Suicidality, have been adapted for use with telehealth to support higher demand for mental health
services.91 The effectiveness of telehealth as a treatment modality has been deemed as equivalent to
in-person treatment for many mental health diagnoses, including post-traumatic stress disorder and
depression, but the effectiveness for specific suicide interventions is less clear at this time.92-94 The
effectiveness of using telehealth alongside existing suicide prevention strategies is a new area of study,
as is consideration for access to technology among people who are at increased risk for suicide.
The Action Alliance has convened diverse sectors to coordinate the Mental Health and Suicide
Prevention National Response to COVID-19 to create sustainable and comprehensive solutions to the
mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The National Response is a public-private partnership
engaging leaders from academia, business, government, nonprofits, non-governmental organizations,
healthcare, public safety, and media and entertainment.95,96
OVERVIEW 19

Assessing the Evidence less evaluation has been done on the effects of the
community engagement and family programs on
suicidal behavior. The approaches provided in this
This Suicide Prevention Resource for Action includes
resource that have effects on risk or protective factors
policies, programs, and practices with evidence
related to suicidal behaviors reflect the developing
of impact on suicide, suicide attempts, or risk or
nature of the evidence base and use of the best
protective factors. It has been updated from the
available evidence at a given time.
original 2017 Preventing Suicide: A Technical Package
of Policy, Programs, and Practices through a review of Importantly, significant heterogeneity in the nature
suicide-related literature published from 2016–2020 and quality of the available evidence often exists
and with input from subject matter experts and state among the policies, programs, or practices in a given
and community leaders. Evidence for inclusion had to strategy or approach. Not all policies, programs, or
meet at least one of the following criteria: practices that utilize the same approach are equally
meta-analysis or systematic review showing effective, and even those that are effective may not
impact on suicide, work across all populations. Tailoring programs for
evidence from at least one rigorous evaluation specific populations that are culturally relevant and
study (e.g., randomized controlled trial or quasi- conducting more evaluations may be necessary to
experimental design with a control group or address different population groups. The policies,
multiple pre- and post-assessments) that found programs, and practices included in the resource
significant preventive effects on suicide, are not intended to be a comprehensive list for each
meta-analysis or systematic review showing impact approach but rather serve as examples that have shown
on risk or protective factors against suicide, or impact on suicide or suicide risk or protective factors.
evidence from at least one rigorous evaluation Learning modules from the Prevention Institute are
study that found significant impacts on risk or available to guide state and community leaders in
protective factors against suicide. International adapting and applying the evidence to meet local
studies were included if they were written in English community needs.
and could potentially be implemented in the U.S.
Each chapter shares evidence from published
context. In evidence sections below, the study
literature that was confirmed by experts for each of
locations are listed for studies conducted outside
the seven suicide prevention strategies. They include
the U.S.
the rationale for the strategy, an overview of the broad
Some approaches do not yet have research evidence approaches, potential outcomes resulting from the
demonstrating impact on suicide rates but are strategy and approaches, and evidence citations for
supported by evidence indicating impacts on risk or each of the approaches. Finally, a section on future
protective factors against suicide. Programs that have directions describes where additional studies are
demonstrated effects on suicide or suicide attempts being conducted or need to be conducted to expand
provide a higher level of evidence, but the evidence the evidence and identify additional approaches.
base is not that strong in all areas. For instance,
20 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Informing Policy
Policies have the potential to influence conditions
and behaviors related to suicide. Informing policy is a
nuanced process and steps may differ depending on
what sector the policy will target (e.g., organizational,
public, state, local). Certain restrictions may apply
to use of federal and other funding sources. Always
seek the advice of a qualified professional with any
questions pertaining to your specific organization or
governmental entity.
This Prevention Resource is provided for informational
purposes. Note that certain restrictions apply to the
use of CDC funds for impermissible lobbying or
attempts to influence policy. For more information
concerning such restrictions, see the Anti-Lobbying
Restrictions for CDC Grantees.
OVERVIEW 21

Strengthen
Economic Supports

Rationale
Historical trends in the U.S. indicate that suicide rates increase during economic
recessions marked by high unemployment rates, job losses, and economic
instability and decrease during economic expansions and periods marked by
low unemployment rates, particularly for working-age individuals 25–64 years
old.77,97-100 Economic and financial strain may increase an individual’s risk for
suicide or may indirectly increase risk by exacerbating existing physical and/
or mental illnesses.101,102 Financial strains could include job loss, long periods of
unemployment, poverty, reduced income, difficulty covering medical, food, and
housing expenses, and even the anticipation of such financial stress. Evictions
and homelessness are also related to suicide.97,103 Reducing these stressors can
potentially buffer suicide risk. For example, strengthening economic support
systems can help people stay in their homes or obtain affordable housing. They
Providing
may also pay for necessities such as food and medical care, job training, childcare,
economic support and other expenses required for daily living. Providing economic support may
reduce stress, anxiety, and the potential for a crisis, thereby preventing risk
may reduce stress,
of suicide. More research is needed on how economic factors interact with
anxiety, and the other factors to increase suicide risk, but the available evidence suggests that
strengthening economic supports may be one opportunity to buffer suicide risk.
potential for a
crisis, thereby
Approaches
preventing risk
of suicide. Economic supports for individuals and families can be strengthened by increasing
household financial security and ensuring stability in housing during periods of
economic stress.
Improve household financial security
This approach can buffer the risk of suicide by providing individuals with the
financial means to lessen the stress and hardship associated with a job loss or
other unanticipated financial problems. The provision of unemployment benefits
and other forms of temporary assistance, livable wages, medical benefits, and
retirement and disability insurance to help cover the cost of necessities or to
offset costs in the event of disability are examples of ways to strengthen
household financial security.
Stabilize housing
This approach seeks to keep people in their homes and provides housing options
for those in need during times of financial insecurity. Housing stabilization
may occur through programs that provide affordable housing to those who
are experiencing homelessness or are at risk of homelessness. It could happen
through government subsidies, loan modification programs, and financial
counseling services to help minimize the risk or impact of foreclosures and eviction.
STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC SUPPORTS 23

Potential Outcomes that an increase in the maximum benefits allowed
through unemployment insurance was protective
against increasing suicide rates during times of
Potential outcomes include
increased unemployment.104 This was particularly
reductions in:
the case among those ages 20–34. Another study in
Financial stress the U.S. examined recipiency rates (the percentage
Emotional distress of unemployed individuals receiving unemployment
Poverty insurance benefits) by state over time and found that
Foreclosure and eviction rates this was also related to reduced suicide rates but
Suicide only among men, non-Hispanic White Americans,
and those ages 45–64 years.105
Evidence Other unemployment support practices.
Government municipalities in Japan implemented
a broad community-based intervention that
Evidence suggests that strengthening household
provided both financial and non-financial support to
financial security and stabilizing housing can reduce
unemployed individuals, such as consultations about
suicide risk.
unemployment, bankruptcy, debt problems, and
Improve household financial security human resource training.106 Researchers found that
this comprehensive intervention reduced suicide rates
Some studies have shown that unemployment
among older males. A meta-analysis of the impact
insurance benefits may offset the relationship
of unemployment support practices (in studies from
between unemployment and suicide. One study found
the U.S., the United Kingdom, Spain, Australia, and
24 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Finland) found that job skills training or group support indicated that the cash transfers reduced annual
interventions reduced levels of depressive symptoms, suicide rates by 18% in the participating subdistricts.
a suicide risk factor, particularly among those at
Other household benefits that may impact suicide
highest risk for clinical depression.107
rates in the U.S. are state supplements to federal
Other household financial security measures. earned income tax credits, Supplemental
One study in the U.S. found that state suicide rates Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) participation,
decreased as per capita spending increased on and Social Security early retirement benefits.110-113
total transfer payments, medical benefits, and Two independent studies found that states that
family assistance such as Temporary Assistance for supplemented the federal earned income tax credit at
Needy Families.108 Researchers estimated 3,000 10% or more had a 3–4% reduction in suicide rates
fewer suicides would occur nationally per year if compared to states with no state supplement.111,112
every state increased its per capita spending on Another study estimated that a 1% increase in SNAP
these types of assistance by $45 per year.108 participation could result in approximately 7,000
fewer suicide deaths.113 A fourth study indicated that
A more rigorous evaluation was carried out in
early access to Social Security benefits reduced suicide
Indonesia examining the impact of cash transfer
rates by 7–8% among those turning 62 years of age.110
payments on suicide rates.109 The program offered
conditional cash transfers of 10% of the household’s Finally, there is growing evidence that increasing
annual consumption for six consecutive years in minimum wages may reduce suicide rates. One
subdistricts with high levels of poverty. Results study in the U.S. estimated that a $1 increase in
STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC SUPPORTS 25

Programs offering support for
individuals and families threatened
by potential eviction or foreclosure
may help prevent suicide.
26 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

minimum wages was associated with a 2% decrease of suicidal ideation after two years.121 A more rigorous
in annual suicide rates.114 Two other studies examined randomized controlled trial done in Canada among
the impact among those with a high school education individuals experiencing homelessness with major
or less. The first study found that a 10% increase in mental health illnesses also observed decreases in
minimum wages was related to a 2.7% decrease in suicidal ideation over two years. However, this impact
non-drug suicide deaths among those with a high was not substantially different from a control group
school education or less.112 A second study indicated who were referred to existing community supports.122
that a $1 increase in minimum wages was associated
The Veterans Health Administration’s programs
with a 6% decrease in suicide rates.115 Increasing
for homeless veterans significantly reduced both
minimum wages can help minimize the disparities
all-cause and suicide mortality among veterans
between increased suicide rates among those of
self-reporting housing instability. These programs
lower versus higher socioeconomic status.116
included:
Stabilize housing Emergency housing services such as Health Care
for Homeless Veterans and Safe Haven programs
A longitudinal analysis of the association between
Rapid rehousing and homelessness prevention
suicides and foreclosures demonstrated that as the
programs such as Supportive Services for Veteran
proportion of foreclosed properties increased, so did
Families
the state suicide rate, particularly among working-
Permanent supportive housing programs such
aged adults.117 Another study analyzing data from
as the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
16 U.S. states found that suicides associated with
Development-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing
home foreclosures and evictions increased more
Transitional housing123
than 100% from before the housing crisis began in
2005 to after it peaked in 2010.97 Most of the suicides
occurred prior to the actual loss of the person’s home. Future Directions
Programs offering support for individuals and families
threatened by potential eviction or foreclosure may
Evidence is still accumulating around many
help prevent suicide.
approaches for strengthening economic supports
A particularly understudied area is the impact of and their relationship with suicide. Many studies
financial assistance and eviction support on suicide show promising correlations between the
risk for individuals with lower incomes who rent interventions and the outcomes at the population
rather than own a home. Studies have not found level. This evidence can be strengthened as states
that rent assistance can reduce suicide, but there is and communities continue to monitor changes
an association between financial assistance programs and impacts using rigorous study designs.
for renters with lower incomes in the U.S. and United
Kingdom and self-reported depression, a suicide
risk factor.118,119
Programs that offer low-barrier housing for
individuals experiencing chronic homelessness
may also help reduce suicide. Housing First is
one such program.120 One study in Canada found
individuals with alcohol problems who entered
Housing First experienced a 43% reduction in severity
STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC SUPPORTS 27

Create Protective
Environments

Rationale
Prevention efforts that focus on changes to the environment can increase the
likelihood of positive behavioral and health outcomes.124 Creating environments
that address risk and protective factors where individuals live, work, and play can
help prevent suicide.1,125 Suicide rates are high among middle-aged adults who
comprise about 43% of the workforce;126 among certain occupational groups;12,127
and among people in detention facilities such as jails or prisons.128 Settings
where these populations work and reside are ideal for implementing policies,
programs, and practices to buffer against suicide. Implementing supportive
policies can change organizational culture by changing social norms, encouraging
help-seeking, and demonstrating that health and mental health are valued.129,130
Modifying characteristics of the physical environment such as access to lethal
means among people at risk can prevent harmful behavior and reduce suicide
Creating
rates, particularly in times of crisis or transition.131-136
environments
that address risk Approaches
and protective
The current evidence suggests three potential approaches for creating
factors where
environments that protect against suicide.
individuals live,
Reduce access to lethal means among persons
work, and play
at risk of suicide
can help prevent
Means of suicide such as firearms, hanging or suffocation, or jumping from
suicide. heights provide little opportunity for rescue. These means have high case-fatality
rates. Almost 90% of people who use a firearm in a suicide attempt die from
their injury.137 Research also indicates that the interval between deciding to act
and attempting suicide can be as short as 5 or 10 minutes138,139 and people tend
not to substitute a different method when a highly lethal method is unavailable
or difficult to access.140-142 Reducing access to lethal means among people at risk
and increasing the time interval between deciding to act and the suicide attempt
can be lifesaving. The following are examples of approaches intended to reduce
access to lethal or available environmental means for persons at risk of suicide:
I nterventions to reduce readily accessible environmental means. A person’s
environment can significantly influence the accessibility of lethal suicide means.
Places where suicides may take place relatively easily include tall structures (such
as bridges, cliffs, balconies, and rooftops), railway tracks, or isolated areas.
Efforts to prevent suicide at these locations include erecting barriers or limiting
access to prevent jumping and installing signs and telephones to encourage
individuals who are considering suicide to seek help.143-147
Safe storage practices and policies. Safe storage of medications, firearms,
and other household products can reduce the risk for suicide by separating
individuals at elevated risk of suicide from easy access to lethal means. Such
CREATE PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENTS 29

practices may include storing firearms in a gun can also improve access to assessments, referrals,
safe or lock box, unloaded and separate from the and helping services such as mental health treatment,
ammunition, and keeping medicines in a locked substance misuse treatment, and financial counseling.
box or other secure location. The provision of a Crisis response plans, postvention, and other measures
safe storage device may also be combined with can also foster a safe physical environment. These
education and counseling about access to lethal policies and cultural shifts can positively impact
means to enhance safe storage practices.146 Finally, organizational climate and morale to help prevent
approaches that effectively limit children’s access suicide and its related risk factors such as depression
to firearms in the home by enhancing safe storage and social isolation.130,149
practices may help prevent youth suicide.
Reduce substance use through
Approaches to put time and space between
lethal means and suicidal individuals may help community-based policies and
save lives. Mandatory waiting periods are laws that practices
delay the possession of firearms for a period of time
Research studies in the U.S. have found that
after purchase. These laws may help insert time and
greater alcohol availability is positively associated
space between an individual’s impulse or decision
with alcohol-involved suicides.150-152 A review of
to attempt suicide and an actual suicide attempt.148
the literature found that acute alcohol use was
associated with more than one-third of suicides and
Create healthy organizational policies
approximately 40% of suicide attempts.153 Policies to
and culture
reduce excessive alcohol use include zoning to limit
Protective environments that promote positive the location and density of alcohol outlets, taxes on
behaviors and norms may be implemented in places alcohol, and bans on the sale of alcohol for individuals
of employment, detention facilities, and other under the legal drinking age.152 Studies have also
secured environments such as residential settings. revealed a connection between suicide attempts
Such policies and cultural values include strong and other substance misuse, such as opioids.51,154
leadership support of policies and programs and One analysis revealed a dose-response relationship
promote pro-social behavior (such as asking for help), between suicide and opioids prescribed for pain,
skill building, and positive social norms among all depicting higher suicide rates among those with
people in the organization or setting. These policies higher dose prescriptions.154
Potential Outcomes
Potential outcomes include
increases in:
safe storage of lethal means, and
access points to low and no cost help-seeking.
Potential outcomes also include
reductions in:
stigma associated with mental illness and
suicide-related outcomes,
suicide, and
substance-related suicide deaths.
30 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Crisis response plans, postvention,
and other measures can also
foster a safe physical environment.
These policies can positively from about 10 suicide deaths per year to about
3 deaths per year.155 The reduction in suicides by
impact organizational climate.
jumping was sustained even when all bridges and
nearby sites were considered. This suggests little to
no displacement of suicide deaths to other jumping
sites.155 Similar results were seen at the Bloor Street
Evidence
Viaduct in Toronto, Canada. Installing a barrier
decreased the average annual deaths by suicide at
The evidence suggests that creating protective the viaduct from 9 to 0.1, with only 1 suicide death
environments can reduce suicide and suicide over the 11 years following its installation.147
attempts by increasing the time and space between
Safe storage. In a case-control study of firearm-
a suicidal individual’s decision to act and an actual
related events in 37 counties in Missouri, Oregon, and
suicide attempt. As with other strategies, the evidence
Washington, and five trauma centers in Washington
is continually evolving. People using this Prevention
and Missouri, researchers found that firearms being
Resource may wish to seek out the latest evidence
stored unloaded, separate from ammunition, and in
since release of this publication.
a locked place (or secured with a safety device) was
protective of suicide attempts among adolescents.156
Reduce access to lethal means among
The Israeli Defense Forces administration enacted a
persons at risk of suicide
prevention strategy that included mandatory storage
Interventions to reduce readily accessible of soldiers’ firearms on base when soldiers went
environmental means. Erecting a barrier on the home for the weekends. This effort resulted in a
Jacques-Cartier Bridge in Montreal, Canada, reduced 40%–50% decrease in suicide rates of soldiers over
the suicide rate from people jumping off the bridge the weekends.157,158
CREATE PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENTS 31

Counseling on Access to Lethal Means (CALM) is a families on lethal means improved after the training.
suicide prevention program designed to reduce access Most participating providers believed CALM provided
to lethal means in times of crisis.163 CALM was initially them with concrete ideas to use in their work (78%),
developed for use by mental health providers but and it addressed an important, often overlooked
has been tailored for use in emergency departments. aspect of suicide prevention (77%).159
The Emergency Department Counseling on Access to
A CALM online training is available to the public on
Lethal Means (ED CALM) was used to train psychiatric
the Suicide Prevention Resource Center (SPRC; listed
emergency clinicians in a large children’s hospital to
under Resources and Programs). This video describes
provide lethal means counseling and safe storage
a CALM partnership between National Center for
boxes to parents of patients under age 18 receiving
Injury Prevention and Control’s Core State Violence
care for suicidal behavior. In a pre-post quality
and Injury Prevention Program and Injury Control
improvement project, Runyan and colleagues found
Research Centers.
that 76% of the 55% of parents who were followed
up with (n = 114) reported that all medications in Approaches to put time and space between lethal
the home were locked as compared with fewer than means and suicidal individuals. A review of child
10% at the time of the initial emergency department access prevention laws concluded that they have
visit.131 Among parents who indicated the presence been associated with lower rates of youth firearm
of guns in the home at pre-test (67%), all (100%) self-injury and suicide.148 These laws, called CAP laws,
reported guns were currently locked at post-test.131 are intended to limit a child’s access to firearms within
the home. Two types of CAP laws exist: those that
Another study evaluated a CALM implementation
hold the firearm owner liable for directly providing the
program with case managers to understand the
firearm to a minor (recklessness laws) and those that
impact of the training on service providers. Case
hold the firearm owner liable for the unsafe storage of
managers reported that most beliefs, attitudes, and
the firearm (negligence laws). In a study of state-level
behavioral intentions about counseling clients and
32 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

CAP firearm laws throughout the U.S. between through education and training, and investigates
1991–2016, negligence CAP laws were associated with every suicide to understand what contributed to the
a 12% relative reduction in firearm suicides among death.163 Researchers using a time-series design found
children and youth under 15 years old.160 However, the program was associated with a 33% relative risk
authors acknowledge that due to the study design, reduction in suicide.163 A longitudinal assessment of
the results cannot be used to indicate causality and the program over the period 1981–2008 (16 years
that residents’ awareness of these laws in a particular before the 1997 launch of the program and 11 years
state is unknown. Some research suggests that gun after the launch) found significantly lower suicide
owners are often not aware of negligent storage CAP rates after the program was launched than before.129
laws in their state and that the presence of the law is These effects were sustained over time, except in
not associated with a significant difference in storage 2004, which the authors found was associated with
practices.161 Lastly, the results do not account for less rigorous implementation of the program.129
differences between states, misclassification in the
Together for Life is a workplace program the
data, or enforcement of CAP laws.160
Montreal Police Force implemented to address suicide
Other policies to put time and space between lethal among officers. Policy and program components
means and people with suicidal thoughts or intent were designed to foster an organizational culture that
include mandatory waiting periods. A systematic promoted mutual support and solidarity among all
review concluded that there is “moderate” evidence members of the force. The program included training
(i.e., two or more studies found significant effects in for supervisors, managers, and all units to improve
the same direction and no contradictory evidence was competencies in identifying suicide risk and use
found in other studies with stronger methods) that and awareness of existing resources. The program
mandatory waiting periods are associated with lower also included an education campaign to improve
firearm suicide rates.148 As above, causality cannot awareness and help-seeking.164 Police suicides were
be inferred due to the correlational nature of the tracked over 12 years and compared to rates in
study design, and the extent to which laws impacted the control city of Quebec. The suicide rate in the
individuals directly is unknown. Also, the effects of intervention group decreased significantly by 79%
waiting periods can be limited because they are likely to a rate of 6.4 suicides per 100,000 population per
to only have protective benefits for those who do not year compared to an 11% increase in the control city
already own a firearm, and the possibility remains (29 per 100,000).164 Suicide decreases were evaluated
that waiting periods might only delay suicide for some 10 years later in a follow-up study. Results indicated
individuals.148 that the decrease in suicides observed 12 years
after initiation of the Together for Life program were
Create healthy organizational policies
sustained in the following 10 years of program’s
and culture operation.165
The United States Air Force Suicide Prevention Primary and secondary school-based organizational
Program is an example of healthy organizational initiatives have also demonstrated effectiveness in
policies and culture.162 The program includes 11 improving staff knowledge and confidence recognizing
policy and education initiatives and was designed to and properly addressing student self-injury and
change the culture within the Air Force surrounding suicidality. Strong Schools Against Suicidality and
suicide. The program uses leaders as role models Self-Injury depicted such results immediately after
and agents of change, establishes expectations implementation of two-day workshops and at six-
for behavior related to awareness of suicide risk, month follow-up evaluations (U.S. and Germany).166,167
develops skills and knowledge in the population
CREATE PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENTS 33

Correctional suicide prevention that involves U.S., Canada, Denmark, Lithuania, Russia, Slovenia,
comprehensive policies and practices can reduce Switzerland, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and
suicide among incarcerated populations through: the Soviet Union171-175 suggest that such measures
can potentially reduce alcohol-involved suicides.
routine suicide prevention training for all staff,
Additionally, a longitudinal analysis of alcohol outlet
standardized intake screening and risk assessment,
density, suicide mortality, and hospitalizations for
provision of shared information between staff
suicide attempts over six years in 581 California
members (especially in transitioning or transferring
ZIP codes indicated that greater density of bars,
of inmates),
specifically, was related to greater suicide and suicide
varying levels of observation,
safe physical environment, attempts, particularly in rural areas.176 Although
correlational, researchers discovered a positive effect
emergency response protocols,
on suicide rates from prescription drug supply
notification of suicidal behavior through the chain
restrictions (as measured by the implementation of
of command, and
critical incident stress debriefing and death review.149 Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs) in locations
with a strong presence of drug treatment facilities and
As a result of this approach, suicide rates among
prescribing of medication-assisted therapy.177
those incarcerated in 11 state prisons in Louisiana
dropped 46%, from a rate of 23.1 per 100,000 before
Future Directions
the intervention to 12.4 per 100,000 the following
year.168 Similar programs both in the U.S. and in other
countries have resulted in declines in suicide.169
Research on how to create protective environments
is ongoing and continually evolving, with evaluations
Reduce substance use through
underway. For example, the Gun Shop Project is
community-based policies
currently active in many states and communities. This
and practices
program educates gun shop owners and customers
about how to identify and respond to a customer who
A meta-analysis of over 870,000 participants in cross-
is potentially at risk of suicide.178,179 This program was
sectional, case-control, and cohort studies identified a
created by community members, a gun shop owner,
strong relationship between substance use disorders
behavioral health and suicide prevention organization
and suicide-related outcomes, including suicidal
ideation, attempts, and deaths.170 Several studies representatives, and public health researchers. Work
is underway to evaluate this program and other
examining reduced alcohol outlet density in the
similar programs.
Additional research is needed to replicate and extend
prior studies related to approaches to reduce access
to firearms among persons at risk for suicide. This
research could include evaluations of strategies to
promote and incentivize safe storage practices and to
enhance awareness of relevant laws and programs to
encourage and sustain consistent safe storage. Future
research could also address the evidence limitations
of CAP laws, mandatory waiting periods, and other
policies that are implemented to prevent firearm
suicide but could benefit from additional research
on their effects.148
34 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Primary and secondary school-
based initiatives have shown
some promising methods for
improving schools’ suicide safety. adverse social conditions.183 Adaptations for specific
populations could be explored and tested, such as the
recommendations for AI/AN people in the community
prevention manual “To Live To See the Great Day
There is ongoing research related to the impact of That Dawns.”184 Adaptations for college and university
discrimination on suicide and the effects of creating
settings are being explored through programs such
healthy organizational cultures and policies. Some
as the 2021 Garrett Lee Smith Campus Suicide
evidence suggests the implementation of same-sex
Prevention grant program, which could provide
marriage policies is associated with reduced
important lessons for future prevention efforts.
numbers of suicide attempts among adolescents
who identify as sexual minorities.180 Similarly, state- Primary and secondary school-based initiatives
have shown some promising methods for improving
level nondiscrimination policies towards sexual
schools’ suicide safety and further work could
minority communities has been associated with
decreased suicide-related hospitalizations.181 A third strengthen such programs. For example, a Creating
Suicide Safety in Schools workshop demonstrated
study including more than 200,000 middle and
increased knowledge about suicide prevention
secondary school-aged youth found that the
practices, enhanced beliefs in the importance of
presence of a gay-straight alliance club on a school’s
school-based prevention and perceived administrative
campus lessened connections between gay-bias
support, and greater confidence in the roles staff
victimization and suicide attempts through
reductions in hopelessness.182 play in suicide safety. At the three-month follow-
up, however, school staff experienced barriers to
Future research may further solidify the relationship
implementing change, primarily insufficient time
between discriminatory policies and practices and
for suicide-focused programming. The authors then
suicide to inform prevention efforts moving forward,
recommended that suicide prevention trainings be
particularly amongst those with historical trauma and accompanied by broader organizational changes.185
CREATE PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENTS 35

Improve Access
and Delivery of
Suicide Care

Rationale
Most people with mental health conditions never attempt or die by suicide,186,187
but these disorders are important risk factors for suicide.3,188 Findings from the
2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) indicate that less than half
(46%) of adults in the U.S. with mental health disorders received treatment for
those conditions.21 Lack of access to mental healthcare is one of the contributing
factors related to the underuse of mental health services. This may be particularly
pertinent for people with serious mental illness, people from racial and ethnic
minority groups, underserved communities, those living in rural communities,
and people who are uninsured.189-191 The intersection of ethnicity with underuse
of mental health services is associated with poverty. It may also be explained
by a combination of factors including social stigma, mistrust of the behavioral
health system, and lack of cultural adaptation of interventions. Identifying ways
Over 121 million
to improve access to timely, affordable, culturally appropriate, and quality care
Americans live for people at risk for suicide is a critical component to prevention.3,192,193 Research
suggests that services are maximized when health and behavioral healthcare
in areas without
systems are set up to effectively and efficiently deliver care.194
enough mental
health providers to Approaches
meet their needs.
Several approaches can be used to improve access and delivery of suicide care.
This shortage
Cover mental health conditions in health insurance policies
is particularly
Federal and state laws include provisions for coverage of mental health services
severe among
in health insurance plans that is on par with coverage for other health concerns,
low-income
called mental health parity.73 Benefits and services covered include the number
urban and rural of visits, co-pays, deductibles, inpatient/outpatient services, prescription drugs,
and hospitalizations. If a state has a stronger mental health parity law than the
communities.
federal parity law, then insurance plans regulated by the state must follow the
state parity law. If a state has a weaker parity law than the federal parity law, that
is, includes coverage for some mental health conditions but not others, then the
federal parity law will replace the state law. Equal coverage does not necessarily
imply coverage of quality care, as health insurance plans vary in the extent to
which benefits and services are offered to address various health conditions.
Increase provider availability in underserved areas
Access to effective and state-of-the-art mental healthcare is largely dependent
upon the training and the size of the mental healthcare workforce. Over 121
million Americans live in areas without enough mental health providers to meet
their needs. This shortage is particularly severe among low-income urban and
rural communities.195,196 Particular populations that remain underserved include
IMPROVE ACCESS AND DELIVERY OF SUICIDE CARE 37

veterans and people from racial and ethnic minority Create safer suicide care through
groups.191,197 Increasing the number and distribution systems change
of mental health providers in underserved areas may
Access to health and behavioral healthcare services
include offering financial incentives through existing
is critical for people at risk of suicide. Care that is
state and federal programs, such as loan repayment
delivered efficiently and effectively can help reduce
programs, and expanding the reach of health
risk of suicide. For example, systems will see benefits
services through telephone, video, and web-based
when suicide prevention and patient safety are
technologies such as telehealth. Additionally,
supported through strong leadership, workforce
community mental health clinics bring providers
training, systematic identification and assessment
directly into underserved communities. These small,
of suicide risk, implementation of evidence-based
government-funded clinics focus on mental health
treatments (see Identify and Support People at
and substance use services. Such approaches can
Risk), continuity of care, and continuous quality
increase the likelihood that those in need will be able
improvement.198 193 Care that is patient-centered
to access affordable quality care for mental health
and promotes equity for all patients is also critically
disorders, which can reduce risk for suicide. Some
important.198
models of care use the existing workforce, such
as collaborative care described in the Identify and
Support People at Risk chapter. Potential Outcomes
Provide rapid and remote access
Potential outcomes include
to help
increases in:
Telemental health (TMH) services refer to the use
use of a variety of clinical services,
of telephone, video, and web-based technologies
consistent and improved risk detection
for providing psychiatric or psychological care at a
across a variety of healthcare settings, and
distance. TMH may offer improved access to mental
support for help-seeking.
healthcare, and it may also ensure continuity of care.
Technological advances in the delivery of TMH have
Outcomes may also include
also resulted in innovations such as use of transcripts
reductions in:
and recordings of mental health services in identifying
suicide risk. TMH can be used to treat a wide range rates of treatment attrition,
of mental health conditions in a variety of settings, symptoms of mental health disorders,
including outpatient clinics, hospitals, and military suicide attempt rates among individuals
treatment facilities. It can also improve access to engaged in clinical care, and
care for patients in isolated areas, as well as reduce suicide rates among individuals engaged
travel time and expenses, reduce delays in receiving in clinical care.
care, and improve satisfaction about interacting
with the mental healthcare system. TMH services
Evidence
increased during the COVID-19 pandemic because
health insurance providers loosened restrictions
around delivery of services via video conference, The following evidence suggests that coverage of
telephone, and other telecommunications such as mental health conditions in health insurance policies
text-based services. and improved access to and delivery of quality suicide
care can reduce risk factors associated with suicide
and may directly impact suicide rates.
38 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Access to health and behavioral
healthcare services is critical for
people at risk of suicide. Care
that is delivered efficiently and
between 1990 and 2004 and found that mental health
effectively can help reduce risk
parity laws, specifically, were associated with about a
of suicide. 5% reduction in suicide rates. This reduction equated
to the prevention of 592 suicides per year in the 29
states with parity laws.204
Cover mental health conditions in
health insurance policies Increase provider availability in
underserved areas
NSDUH is a nationally representative survey of the
U.S. population that provides data on substance use, Incentive programs such as the National Health
mental health conditions, and service utilization.199 Service Corps (NHSC) encourage individuals to
Harris, Carpenter, and Bao used data from this work in the mental health profession in locations
survey and found that 12 months after states enacted designated as Health Professional Shortage
mental health parity laws, the self-reported use of Areas (HPSAs) in exchange for student loan debt
mental healthcare services significantly increased, repayment.205 One study suggested that NHSC
which is a protective factor against suicide.200-202 providers accounted for the majority of significant
Similarly, a recent review of the literature suggested increases in behavioral healthcare providers in rural
that overall mental healthcare utilization was areas of the country between 2013 and 2017 and that
associated with the presence of mental health parity 61% of mental and behavioral healthcare providers
laws, including among children and adolescents living continued to practice in designated HPSAs after their
in households with incomes below the federal poverty four-year NHSC commitment.206 This program has not
level.202 An early study found no effects on state been evaluated for impact on suicide, but it addresses
suicide outcomes.203 However, a later study by Lang access to care, which is a critical component and
examined state mental health laws and suicide rates protective factor for suicide prevention.
IMPROVE ACCESS AND DELIVERY OF SUICIDE CARE 39

Internet-delivered cognitive
behavior therapy between a
patient and therapist has been
clinics established to increase service availability
shown to significantly decrease
across municipalities in Brazil.213
suicidal ideation among patients
Provide rapid and remote
with severe depression.
access to help
A systematic review of TMH services (country locations
not stated) found that services rated as high or
Increasing provider availability in underserved areas
good quality were effective in reducing symptoms
using community mental health clinics has also
in patients with disorders such as depression,
shown some relationship to preventing suicides in
schizophrenia, and substance use.208 Mohr and
communities in the U.S. and in international studies.
colleagues conducted a meta-analysis examining
In a retrospective study examining the availability of
the effect of psychotherapy delivered specifically via
mental health clinics and suicide rates in the U.S., the
telephone and found that it significantly reduced
number of community mental health clinics decreased
depressive symptoms and resulted in lower attrition
by 14% from 2014 to 2017, while suicides increased
rates (country locations not stated).209
by almost 10%. Statistical models controlling for
other variables suggested that most of the increase As part of telemental health, synchronous clinical
could be attributed to the reduction in community video telehealth (CVT) may be increasing. Patients
mental health clinics.207 Rates of hospitalizations for can receive therapy or medication management via a
suicide attempts decreased, but suicide rates did variety of video conferencing tools using CVT.210 CVT
not decrease in a study of community mental health was employed during the COVID-19 pandemic due to
40 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

temporary loosening of federal and state regulations. a quality improvement model, to transform the way
A meta-analysis of 21 CVT studies specifically for health systems care for people with suicidal thoughts
populations of rural areas showed initial evidence that and behaviors. Studies in Australia and the U.S. have
it can be used to manage suicide risk by providing shown the effectiveness of the Zero Suicide model in
screening, treatment, and safety planning remotely.94 reducing suicide attempts and ideation.216,217
Another growing method of providing rapid and
remote access to services is through mobile Future Directions
applications (apps) where brief interventions
occur on mobile phones. Evidence in a comparative
Access to mental health and substance use disorder
effectiveness trial of three mobile apps for depression
treatment services is critical for suicide prevention.
showed improvement in symptoms in individuals
Unfortunately, many people at risk for suicide do not
with moderate depression.211 Similarly, internet-
meet criteria for these treatments, delay treatment,
delivered cognitive behavior therapy between a
or do not seek treatment.21 Suicide prevention efforts
patient and therapist has been shown to significantly
that focus on the above approaches can support
decrease suicidal ideation among patients with severe
people at risk and help prevent risk in the first place.
depression (U.S. and Ireland).211,212
Access to care also relies on the cultural relevance of
the care, and additional information is needed on how
Create safer suicide care through
cultural adaptations improve access and utilization
systems change
of suicide care. Reaching out to people through other
Zero Suicide seeks to eliminate suicide among methods, including primary care and community
patients engaged with health systems. The Henry outreach as described in the Identify and Support
Ford Health System (HFHS) implemented a program People at Risk chapter, can also be beneficial. More
that screened and assessed each behavioral health methods that utilize existing medical providers in the
patient for suicide risk and implemented coordinated, service of suicide prevention are also supported in
continuous follow-up care systemwide.213 The Zero the literature and growing in practice.
Suicide model was derived from the HFHS program
and other models of health systems change to
improve suicide care, as detailed in the Suicide Care
in Systems Framework from the Action Alliance. An
examination of the impact of the program found a
dramatic and statistically significant decrease in the
rate of suicide between the baseline years, 1999 and
2000, and the intervention years, 2002–2009. The
suicide rate fell by 82% during this time period.213,214
Specifically, while the rate of suicide in the general
Michigan population increased over the period, the
suicide rate significantly decreased over time among
HFHS members who received mental health specialty
services.215 Further, the suicide rate increased for HFHS
members who accessed only general medical services
as opposed to specialty mental health services.215
Based on these results, the Zero Suicide model was
developed, incorporating seven components (lead,
train, identify, engage, treat, transition, improve) of
IMPROVE ACCESS AND DELIVERY OF SUICIDE CARE 41

Promote Healthy
Connections

Rationale
Sociologist Emile Durkheim theorized in 1897 that weak social bonds, or lack
of connections, were among the chief causes of suicidality.218 Connectedness
is the degree to which an individual or group of individuals are socially close
or interrelated or share resources with others. Social connections can be
formed within and between multiple levels of the social ecology, for instance,
between individuals such as peers, neighbors, and co-workers; families; schools;
neighborhoods; workplaces; faith communities; cultural groups; and society
as a whole.125 Literature consistently depicts social connection and school
connectedness as protective factors against physical and psychological disorders,
all causes of mortality, and suicidal ideation and attempts.219,220 Those who are
more socially connected also report greater well-being and life satisfaction.221
The quality of connections and the social norms of the group are important
Connectedness
components to consider. For example, unhealthy social norms within a group
and social capital could constrain individual group members’ behaviors, beliefs, and identities.222
together may Social capital is related to connectedness and refers to a sense of trust in one’s
community and neighborhood, social integration, and also the availability of
protect against
and participation in social organizations.223,224 Ecological cross-sectional and
suicidal behaviors longitudinal studies have examined the impact of aspects of social capital on
depression symptoms, depressive disorder, mental health more generally, and
by decreasing
suicide. Existing studies, though limited, suggest a positive association between
isolation and social capital (as measured by social trust and community/neighborhood
engagement) and improved mental health.225,226
encouraging
Connectedness and social capital together may protect against suicidal behaviors
adaptive coping
by decreasing isolation; encouraging adaptive coping behaviors; and increasing
behaviors. belongingness, personal value, and worth to help build resilience in the face of
adversity. Connectedness and social capital can also provide individuals with
better access to formal supports and resources, mobilize communities to meet
the needs of their members, and provide collective primary prevention activities
to the community as a whole.227 Connection to a group in which members
reinforce healthy behaviors may be protective.228 Evidence that some social
ties may increase an individual’s risk for suicidal behavior,229 however, is also
consistent with Durkheim’s formulation that connections and norms within
relationships influence suicide risk in positive and negative ways.
Finally, schools can be especially well-suited to provide connectedness
interventions that reach youth. Rich literature supports the association between
school connectedness and reduced self-report of suicidal ideation or suicide
attempt.220 Increased school connectedness is associated with reduced reports
of suicidal thoughts and behaviors across adolescents, including adolescents who
identify as sexual minorities, as well as other individuals including those residing
in communities with increased risk of suicide and those experiencing physical
PROMOTE HEALTHY CONNECTIONS 43

abuse, sexual abuse, and/or bullying.220 The research connect with other community members,
suggests that school psychologists and other student organizations, and resources. Participation results
support personnel have an important role to play in in enhanced overall physical health, reduced stress,
facilitating school connectedness.220 and decreased depressive symptoms, thereby
reducing risk of suicide.
Approaches
Potential Outcomes
Promoting healthy connections among individuals and
within communities through modeling healthy peer Potential outcomes include
norms and enhancing community engagement may increases in:
protect against suicide.
healthy coping attitudes and behaviors,
referrals for youth in distress,
Promote healthy peer norms
help-seeking behaviors among youth
This approach seeks to normalize protective factors
and adults, and
for suicide, such as help-seeking, reaching out, and
positive perceptions of adult and peer support.
adaptive coping. Healthy peer norms can be achieved
Potential outcomes may also include reductions in
through leveraging the influence that members
feelings of social isolation.
of natural social networks have on each other day
to day and can be used to shift group-level beliefs
and promote positive social and behavioral change. Evidence
These approaches typically focus on youth and are
delivered in school settings, but they have also been
Current evidence suggests several positive benefits
implemented in community and military settings.228,230
of healthy peer norms and community engagement
Peer support programs that connect individuals activities.
with mental health and substance use disorders
with peers that have lived experience can facilitate a Promote healthy peer norms
sense of connectedness and belonging. Peer support
Evaluations show that programs such as Sources
is provided by individuals who have demonstrated
of Strength can improve school norms and beliefs
success in their recovery process and help others
about suicide that are created and disseminated
experiencing similar situations. Peer support workers
by student peers. A randomized controlled trial of
help individuals become and stay engaged in the
Sources of Strength conducted with 18 high schools
recovery process through shared understanding,
(6 metropolitan, 12 rural) found that the program
respect, and mutual empowerment.231
improved adaptive norms regarding suicide,
connectedness to adults, and school engagement.50
Engage community members in
Peer leaders were also more likely than controls
shared activities
to refer a friend at risk for suicide to an adult.
Community engagement is an aspect of social For students, the program resulted in increased
capital.232 Community engagement approaches may perceptions of adult support for youth at risk for
involve residents participating in a range of activities, suicide, particularly among those with a history of
including religious activities, community clean-up suicidal ideation, and the acceptability of help-seeking
and greening activities, and group physical exercise. behaviors. Trained peer leaders also reported a
These activities provide opportunities for residents greater decrease in maladaptive coping attitudes
to become more involved in the community and to compared with untrained leaders.50
44 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Peer support programs that
connect individuals with mental
health and substance use
disorders with peers that have
Wingman-Connect reported lower suicidal ideation
lived experience can facilitate severity and depression symptoms at one month
post-intervention and lower depression symptoms at
a sense of connectedness and
one and six months post-intervention when compared
belonging. to a control group that participated in a stress
management program.228 Participants’ perception
of belonging to a more cohesive class with healthier
norms accounted for a significant portion of the
The Wingman-Connect program is an adaptation
program’s impact on reducing suicidal ideation and
of Sources of Strength as an upstream suicide
depression symptoms.228
and depression prevention program for a general,
non-clinical Air Force population. Wingman-Connect
Engage community members
trains all unit members together to incorporate skills
in shared activities
into unit culture and build cohesion and shared
purpose. Group skill building within the natural Community building programs may also have mental
organizational units emphasizes social bonds, health effects. A vacant lot greening initiative was
meaning in work, and managing career and personal undertaken in Philadelphia between 1999 and 2008
stressors. In a cluster randomized clinical trial, where local residents and community members
personnel in technical training classes assigned to worked together to clean up and plant flowers and
PROMOTE HEALTHY CONNECTIONS 45

trees in 4,436 lots (or 7.8 million square feet) in four Men’s Shed presents another promising practice
areas of the city.233 Researchers found significant to promote social connectedness among adult
reductions in community residents’ self-reported level peers.237 Men’s Shed started in Australia and spread
of stress, a risk factor for suicide, and engagement to the United Kingdom and the U.S. It provides a
in more physical exercise, a protective factor for communal space for older men to socialize, learn new
suicide, than residents in control vacant lot areas. skills, and engage in practical activities with other
There is some evidence for other cross-cutting men, such as woodworking. One preliminary study
benefits including fewer firearm assaults and less suggests increased social connectedness, health,
vandalism.233-235 and well-being among men participating in Men’s
Shed.238 Both PREVAIL and Men’s Shed focus on specific
populations. Other population groups may also
Future Directions
benefit from healthy peer norm programs that pay
particular attention to cultural norms and conditions.
Promising practices emphasizing connection with
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented serious
peers in adult populations may become more
challenges to healthy connections among all people.
common ways of preventing suicide in the future.
The pandemic has forced people into using novel
For example, the Peers for Valued Living (PREVAIL)
formats for engagement and connection, such as
program incorporates peers with lived experience
video conferencing, online chat, and mobile apps.
to provide support to adults who are at high risk of
Stack Up is a nonprofit veteran organization whose
suicide immediately after an inpatient psychiatric
goal is to use video games to bring veterans together,
hospitalization. Initial research has supported
using a virtual space to increase connectedness in
the acceptability, feasibility, and fidelity of the
an online peer support program.239 Stack Up created
intervention.236
the Stack Up Overwatch Program (StOP) because
46 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

they recognized a need in the gaming-focused The app provides free 24/7 access to online health
online community. This suicide prevention and crisis and wellness resources, peer-to-peer support, and
intervention program is delivered entirely through volunteer opportunities to users.
the internet by trained peers using a gaming platform
Finally, the pandemic has raised concerns about the
text and voice chat feature. The program combines
mental well-being of children, particularly those
elements of virtual gaming communities, veteran
with pre-existing behavioral health conditions.241
mental health, and community-based peer support
Additional research is warranted regarding strategies
and provides an innovative format for implementing
to engage children, help them connect with community
a suicide prevention program. Another program
members and community resources, and prevent
by Objective Zero Foundation utilizes mobile
suicide.242,243 There is still a lot to learn about changes
application technology for peer-to-peer support
in connectedness during COVID-19 and at other times
to enable global connection of service members,
of infrastructure disruptions.
veterans, family members, and caregivers.240
PROMOTE HEALTHY CONNECTIONS 47

Teach Coping
and Problem-
Solving Skills

Rationale
Building life skills prepares individuals to successfully tackle everyday challenges
and adapt to stress and adversity. These skills encompass many concepts but
most often include coping and problem-solving skills, emotional regulation,
conflict resolution, and critical thinking. Life skills are important in protecting
individuals from suicidal behaviors and in reaching key developmental milestones
that impact psychological health, such as success at school and work.230,244
Suicide prevention programs focusing on life skills training are drawn from
social cognitive theories.245 They suggest that suicidal behavior is influenced by a
combination of direct learning and environmental and individual characteristics.
Teaching and providing youth with both education and skills to manage everyday
challenges and stressors is an important developmental component to suicide
prevention. It can help prevent suicide risk factors such as adverse childhood
Life skills are
experiences (abuse and neglect), substance use, and more.246,247 Acquiring coping
important in and problem-solving skills also occurs and is beneficial in adulthood. Adults often
face new and challenging life events requiring the need for education, coping and
protecting
problem-solving skills essential for maintaining well-being and protecting against
individuals from suicide. For example, healthy parent-child relationships can promote safe, stable,
nurturing family environments and relationships.248
suicidal behaviors
and in reaching
Approaches
key developmental
milestones Programs that teach coping and problem-solving could include lessons on social-
emotional skills, parenting skills and family relationship building, and resilience.
that impact
Support social-emotional learning (SEL) programs
psychological
health. This approach focuses on developing and strengthening communication and
problem-solving skills, emotional regulation, conflict resolution, and coping
skills in youth. Such programs are designed to foster the development of
five interrelated sets of cognitive, affective, and behavioral competencies:
self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and
responsible decision-making.249 These approaches are typically delivered to all
students in a particular grade or school. However, some programs also focus
on groups of students considered to be at increased risk for suicide, including
those who have experienced ACEs. Opportunities to practice and reinforce skills
are an important part of programs that work.250
Teach parenting skills to improve family relationships
This approach provides caregivers with support and is designed to strengthen
parenting skills, enhance positive parent-child interactions, and improve
children’s behavioral and emotional skills and abilities.250 Programs are typically
designed for parents or caregivers with children in a specific age range and can
TEACH COPING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING SKILLS 49

be self-directed or delivered to individual families or Evidence
groups of families. Some programs have sessions
primarily with parents or caregivers, while others
Several SEL programs, parenting and family relationship
include sessions for parents or caregivers, youth, and
programs, and resilience and education programs in
the family. Specific program content typically varies by
adulthood have improved resilience and reduced risk
the age of the child but often has consistent themes
factors for suicide, such as depression, internalizing
of child development, parent-child communication
behaviors, and substance use.252
and relationships, positive parenting and problem-
solving skills, and youth interpersonal and problem-
Support social-emotional
solving skills.251
learning programs
Support resilience through SEL programs are associated with positive outcomes
education programs including reduced emotional distress, improved
well-being, and better social and academic
This approach provides adults with skills to effectively
adjustment, based on studies from the U.S. and other
manage new and challenging life events, such as
countries.253-256 SEL components related to suicide
going to college, entering the job market, or becoming
prevention and help-seeking reduce stigma and
a parent. Programs are typically time-limited with
increase help-seeking behavior. SEL programs provide
an emphasis on education, resiliency, emotion
children and youth with skills to resolve problems
regulation, coping skills, and problem-solving skills.
in relationships, in school, and with peers and help
Specific program content varies by life circumstances,
youth address other negative influences such as
but all programs emphasize the didactic nature of skill
substance use associated with suicide.230
building and interactive practice exercises. Education
programs in adulthood are usually provided by The Youth Aware of Mental Health Program (YAM)
universities for students, employers for their is a universal school-based program for teenagers
employees, or healthcare providers. ages 13–17. It uses interactive dialogue, small group
discussions, and role-playing to teach adolescents
about themes related to mental health; self-help
Potential Outcomes
advice; stress and crisis, depression, and suicidal
thoughts; helping a friend in need; and asking for
Potential outcomes include advice/help. YAM also includes a student booklet that
improvements in: provides information about the risk and protective
factors associated with suicide and education about
social competence and emotion regulation skills,
depression and anxiety. YAM is designed to enhance
problem-solving and conflict management skills, and
adolescents’ problem-solving skills for dealing with
help-seeking behavior.
adverse life events, stress, school concerns, and
other problems. A cluster randomized controlled
They may also include reductions in:
trial conducted in 168 schools in 10 European
stigma surrounding mental health concerns,
Union countries showed that students in schools
depression, anxiety, conduct problems, and
randomized to YAM were significantly less likely to
substance use,
attempt suicide or have severe suicidal ideation at the
suicidal ideation, and
12-month follow-up when compared with students in
suicide attempts.
control schools, which received educational materials
and care as usual. The relative risk of youth suicide
attempts among the YAM group was reduced by
over 50% and relative risk related to severe suicidal
50 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Teaching coping and problem-
solving skills can help children
deal with issues in relationships,
in school, and with peers in a
GBG, neither suicidal ideation nor suicide attempts
healthy way. were significantly different between GBG and the
control interventions.259 This result may have been
due to a lack of implementation fidelity including less
ideation also fell by about 50%.257 These reductions mentoring and monitoring of teachers. GBG was also
are partially attributed to reported changes in coping associated with reduced risk of later substance use
strategies. The results also suggest that socialization and other suicide risk factors among the first cohort.
occurring during the YAM program may play a major Results for the second cohort were generally smaller
role in its efficacy.258 but in the desired direction.260 Students’ positive
integration into peer groups partially explains the
Another example is the Good Behavior Game (GBG),
relationship between GBG and reduction of risk
a classroom-based program for elementary school
for later suicide attempts, particularly for more
children ages 6–10. The program uses a team-based
disruptive students.261
behavior management strategy that promotes
good behavior by setting clear expectations for International research provides additional support
good behavior and consequences for maladaptive for SEL programs. The Aussie Optimism Program is
behavior. The goal of GBG is to create an integrated a universal prevention strategy designed to reduce
classroom social system that is supportive of all mental health concerns among children in sixth and
children being able to learn with little aggressive or seventh grade by teaching social, emotional, and
disruptive behavior.259 An evaluation of GBG indicated cognitive skills including identifying feelings, decision-
that first-graders in the first cohort in GBG reported making, and coping skills. A randomized controlled
half the adjusted odds of suicidal ideation and trial examining the efficacy of the program found
suicide attempts when assessed approximately 15 significantly greater increases in pro-social behavior
years later, compared with peers who had been in a and lower rates of suicidal ideation compared with
standard classroom setting. In the second cohort of control groups.262
TEACH COPING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING SKILLS 51

Signs of Suicide (SOS) is a universal school-based Teach parenting skills to improve
suicide prevention program that uses psychoeducation family relationships
to modify behavior in middle and high school students.
Parenting and family skills training approaches
It also includes screening for elevated depression and
have well-established impacts in reducing common
substance use disorders. SOS is not an SEL program,
risk factors for suicide264 and strengthening family
but it uses psychoeducation as the primary tool for
bonds, a protective factor against suicide.265 Several
training and skill building. The program is designed to:
programs have shown promising impacts on reducing
increase understanding that major depression
suicidal thoughts and behaviors. The Incredible
is an illness,
Years (IY) is a comprehensive group training program
improve awareness of the link between
for parents, teachers, and children. It is designed to
suicide and depression,
reduce conduct problems and substance use (two
improve attitudes toward intervening with
important suicide risk factors in youth) by improving
peers showing signs of depression and
protective factors such as responsive and positive
suicidal ideation, and
parent-teacher-child interactions and relationships,
increase help-seeking behavior for students
emotional self-regulation, and social competence.250
personally experiencing depression and
The program includes 9–20 sessions offered in
suicidal thoughts.263
community-based settings, such as religious centers,
A randomized controlled trial found that individuals recreation centers, mental health treatment centers,
completing the program were 64% less likely to report and hospitals. Several studies have demonstrated
a suicide attempt within the past three months when the effect of the IY program on reducing internalizing
compared with the control group, but the program symptoms, such as anxiety, depression, and child
was not associated with changes in suicidal ideation.263 conduct problems.266-268 The program is also
52 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

associated with improved problem-solving and Families has significantly decreased externalizing
conflict management, which were skills the participants behaviors, such as aggression, alcohol use, and drug
were able to maintain at the one-year follow-up.266-268 use among youth participants, as well as reduced
The program demonstrated greater benefits in depression, alcohol use, and drug use among
mother-rated child internalizing symptoms, when participating families.269
compared with the waitlisted control group.250
Other parenting skills and family programs initially
The Strengthening Families Program involves developed to prevent substance use or other
sessions for parents, youth, and families to teach behavioral problems have shown impacts on reducing
parenting skills, children’s social skills, and family likelihood of suicidal thoughts and behaviors based
life skills. The goals include: on long-term follow-up of participants.270 The Family
Check-Up, for example, is a multi-level intervention
improving parents’ skills for disciplining, managing
that integrates assessment with motivation-
emotions and conflict, and communicating with
enhancement strategies and tailored intervention
their children,
goals to meet the needs of each family. Long-term
promoting youths’ interpersonal and problem-
follow-up of participants in a school-based version
solving skills, and
of Family Check-Up beginning in sixth grade found
creating family activities to build cohesion and
reduced risk for suicidal thoughts and behaviors
positive parent-child interactions.
through late adolescence.271
The premise of the program is that developing
these skills for both parents and children will reduce Parenting and family skills training programs have
internalizing behavior and adolescent substance use, also been developed and tailored for family-specific
two important risk factors for suicide.269 Strengthening situations. The Family Bereavement Program
TEACH COPING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING SKILLS 53

related to value-driven behavior, mindfulness, and
combines parenting and youth skill building in 12
thinking about things using a growth mindset. First-
sessions for children who have experienced the death
year students completing the resilience training
of a parent. A randomized trial that contrasts the
program reported significantly lower self-reported
program with a self-study curriculum found short-
depression and perceived stress compared with first-
term positive impacts on children’s coping skills and
year students in the control condition.275
behavioral and emotional well-being. Participants were
up to 5 times less likely to report suicidal thoughts
and/or behaviors at the 6-year and 15-year follow-up.272
Future Directions
Familias Unidas is a prevention program focused on
parenting that is culturally specific to Latino families The continued stigma that surrounds talking about
going through acculturation. The program utilizes mental health and suicide is a major barrier to
eight multi-family group visits and four family visits implementing coping and problem-solving skills
with a focus on parent-child communication and groups despite the benefit to individuals across the
effective discipline. Preliminary evidence found lower lifespan.185 There is also a need for additional program
rates of suicide attempts for youth reporting poor development and research to ensure that coping and
parent-child communication who were randomized problem-solving skills are useful for a wide range
to Familias Unidas.273 of individuals taking into account sex, race and
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation,
After Deployment Adaptive Parenting Tools
and disability status.276
(ADAPT) is a parenting program for active duty military
members, veterans, first responders, and immigrant Although promising, additional trials and replication
and refugee families with school-aged children.274 of findings are needed to confirm benefits of other
ADAPT provides training in emotional regulation and college and adult programs. One study developed
parenting skills to parents who have experienced a two-semester-long college course titled Risk and
stress and/or trauma in their lives and/or work. Resilience in Urban Teens for college students to
Given the suicide risk associated with poor parental complete and receive course credit. The first semester
mental health and/or suicidality on children, ADAPT provides didactic training in evidence-based skills
seeks to improve the parents’ mental health, with to manage stress and boost resilience. The second
the hope to subsequently reduce suicidal ideation semester is devoted to service learning in which
in children. ADAPT has been found to significantly college students teach stress reduction and coping
improve parenting locus of control, strengthen skills to high school students in the community.
emotion regulation skills, and reduce suicidal Compared with a control group of students from a
ideation in parents when compared with those different course, students completing the course
assigned to the control condition.274 reported significantly lower perceived stress,
engaged in more coping skills, and experienced fewer
Support resilience through dysfunctional attitudes such as “If a person asks for
education programs help, it is a sign of weakness” or “If I fail at my work,
then I am a failure as a person.” The study group
Major life events commonly occur in adulthood,
maintained the positive intervention effects over the
requiring new or refreshed coping and problem-
second semester.277
solving skills to manage stress and maintain resilience.
Primary prevention programs to boost resilience Occupational stress in adulthood is associated with
have been examined in first-year college students. A risk factors for suicide, including anxiety, depression,
four-week resilience training program was tested in and post-traumatic stress disorder.278 Programs that
a pragmatic clinical trial. The program taught skills
54 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

The continued stigma that
surrounds talking about mental
health and suicide is a major
barrier to implementing coping
of pregnancy and childbirth and are associated with
and problem-solving skills groups.
maternal depression, anxiety, and increased risk
of depression and anxiety in children.280 Perinatal
education and training programs have been
developed to increase coping skills and problem-
teach skills like problem-solving, self-regulation,
solving abilities. One such program in Hong Kong
and emotional awareness have been implemented
was tested by adding three additional one-hour
across a diverse range of occupations including
sessions to a standard childbirth education program.
nurses, first responders, sales managers, and
These sessions included an overview of stress,
administrative staff.279 A systematic review found that
expected emotional changes during the perinatal
these programs can reduce negative mental health
period, coping skills training related to parenting,
outcomes including depression and anxiety.279 Some
and problem-solving and decision-making strategies
occupational programs are specifically developed
specific to childcare and parenting. Women who
to reduce suicide risk and improve prevention (see
received this training reported significantly lower
Creating Protective Environments chapter).
levels of depressive symptoms from baseline to
Finally, parenthood is another life period with many six months postpartum and significantly higher
new challenges and stressors. Perinatal mood and learned resourcefulness from baseline to six weeks
anxiety disorders are the number one complication postpartum when compared with the control group.281
TEACH COPING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING SKILLS 55

Identify and
Support People
at Risk

Rationale
Identifying and supporting people at risk for suicide is critical to suicide
prevention. Groups disproportionately impacted by suicidal thoughts, attempts,
and/or suicide include:
males (suicide),
females (suicide attempts),
middle-aged and older adults (suicide),
people living with a mental health disorder,
people who have previously attempted suicide,
people with a history of non-suicidal self-injury,
veterans and active-duty military personnel,
individuals who are institutionalized,
people with exposure to adverse childhood experiences,
Different methods violence, or traumatic stress,
people experiencing unstable housing,
are needed for
individuals with substance use disorders,
interventions
individuals of sexual minority status,
some displaced persons or refugees,
and treatments
people with lower incomes, and
that are culturally
some racial and ethnic groups, including non-Hispanic American Indian
sensitive and or Alaska Native, non-Hispanic Black, and non-Hispanic White adolescents
and young adults.27,183,282-294
tailored to meet
Supporting people at risk requires proactive case finding and effective response,
the needs of
crisis intervention, and evidence-based treatments. However, improving and
populations. expanding services does not guarantee those who need the services the most
will utilize them. For example, some people living in communities experiencing
disadvantage may face social and economic issues that can adversely affect
their ability to access supportive services.195,295 Different methods are needed for
interventions and treatments that are culturally sensitive and tailored to meet
the needs of populations disproportionately impacted by suicide and suicide
risk. Key priorities are developing optimal ways of identifying individuals at risk,
customizing services to make them more accessible (such as internet-based or
mobile technology telehealth services when appropriate), and engaging people in
evidence-based care,213,296,297 especially during times of infrastructure disruption
like the COVID-19 pandemic.296,298,299
Approaches
Gatekeeper training and suicide risk screening and assessment are two
approaches that can identify and help people at increased suicide risk. Crisis
response interventions, proactive planning and outreach interventions, and
therapeutic approaches are intervention and treatment approaches to support
disproportionately affected populations.
IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK 57

Train gatekeepers Provide therapeutic approaches
Gatekeepers can come from all sectors of the These approaches can increase retention in treatment
community. They can help prevent suicide by being and decrease suicide risk by:
trained to identify people who may be at risk for
developing integrated care teams (such as linkage
suicide or suicidal behavior and to respond effectively
between primary care and behavioral healthcare),
by facilitating referrals to treatment and other support
promoting collaboration between patient
services. Gatekeepers could include peers, teachers,
and therapist or care manager, and
coaches, clergy, emergency responders, primary and engaging and motivating patients.305-307
urgent care providers, and others. This training may
Therapeutic approaches include various forms of
be implemented in a variety of settings to identify and
suicide-focused psychotherapy delivered by clinically
support people at risk.300
trained providers. They address underlying mental
Respond to crises health disorders and suicide risk factors such as poor
problem-solving and emotional regulation skills.
These approaches take place in real time when a crisis
Treatment usually takes place in a one-on-one or
occurs and provide support, risk assessment, and
group format between patients, family members,
referral to emergency services or treatment. Typically,
and clinicians. It can vary in duration from several
a person in crisis (or a friend or family member of
weeks to ongoing therapy, as needed. It appears to
the person at risk) is connected to trained volunteers
be particularly important for children and adolescents
or professional staff via telephone hotline, online
to enhance protection and support through work
chat, text messaging, or in person.301 Crisis response
with families or other safe adults within the youth’s
interventions are intended to reduce key risk factors
environment. More detailed information about
for suicide, including feelings of depression, isolation,
identifying and supporting young people at risk
and hopelessness, and promote subsequent mental
for suicide can be found in comprehensive guide
healthcare utilization.302 Crisis response interventions
from SAMHSA.
can put space or time between an individual who may
be considering suicide and harmful behavior.
Potential Outcomes
Plan for safety and follow-up after
an attempt
Potential outcomes include:
Preventing reattempts includes safety and crisis
enhancements in care transitions,
response plans, follow-up contact, and brief contact
increases in treatment engagement
interventions that use diverse modalities such as
and adherence, and
home visits, mail, telephone, or text messages.
improvements in coping skills.
These strategies are designed to help individuals get
treatment when they have recently attempted suicide.
Potential outcomes can also
They can also increase adherence to treatment and
include reductions in:
promote continuity of care.303,304
depression and feelings of hopelessness,
suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts and reattempts, and
suicide rates.
58 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Evidence thoughts who called 17 National Suicide Prevention
Lifeline centers. The researchers found that callers
who spoke with ASIST-trained counselors reported
The current evidence suggests that identifying people
feeling significantly less depressed, less suicidal,
at risk for suicide, engaging individuals in suicide-
less overwhelmed, and more hopeful by the end of
focused treatment, and engaging in crisis care as
their call when compared with callers who spoke to
needed can reduce risk factors for suicide and
counselors not trained with ASIST.302,309 ASIST training
ultimately suicide deaths.
did not result in more comprehensive suicide risk
Train gatekeepers assessments than usual care training.302,309
There are many gatekeeper trainings available with Gatekeeper training has been a primary component
varying degrees of evidence as well as duration of of the Garrett Lee Smith (GLS) Suicide Prevention
program effects. Applied Suicide Intervention Skills Program, which has been implemented in 50 states
Training (ASIST) is a widely implemented training and 50 tribes. A multi-site evaluation assessed the
program that helps hotline counselors, emergency impact of community gatekeeper training as a part
workers, and other gatekeepers identify and connect of GLS implementation on suicide attempts and
with individuals with suicidal thoughts and/or deaths among young people ages 10–24. Counties
behaviors, understand their reasoning for living and that implemented GLS trainings had significantly
dying, and assist with safely connecting those in need lower youth suicide rates up to two years following
to available resources.308,309 Researchers evaluated the the training when compared with similar counties
ASIST training in a randomized controlled trial using that did not offer GLS trainings.310,311
data from 1,410 individuals experiencing suicidal
IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK 59

There is emerging literature on
crisis response services that
utilize mobile technology to
provide real-time crisis support. supportive behaviors toward peers and help-seeking
from trusted adults.315 Both programs were effective
at improving self-efficacy related to helping individuals
at risk and increasing the likelihood of engaging
Other examples of widely implemented gatekeeper in gatekeeping behaviors (studies in multiple
training programs include Question, Persuade, countries).312-317
and Refer (QPR), Mental Health First Aid (MHFA),
Most studies of gatekeeper training demonstrate
and teen Mental Health First Aid (tMHFA). QPR is
that these programs increase knowledge, skills, and
an hour-long training that aims to reduce stigma
self-efficacy or confidence in the gatekeeper’s ability
and increase knowledge about suicide risk factors,
to identify an individual who is at risk and provide
warning signs, and available resources. QPR training
support in the short term. The long-term effects
also focuses on skill building to improve gatekeepers’
of these programs are unclear and little is known
abilities to ask individuals about their suicidal
regarding how to improve the sustainability of these
thoughts or plans and persuade them to seek help.
outcomes in those who are trained.318
QPR training results improve gatekeeping skills like
inquiring about suicidal ideation and referring
Respond to crises
individuals for treatment (studies in U.S. and
Australia).312,313 MFHA is a skills-based program that The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline
teaches participants about mental health (studies (the Lifeline), now called 988 Suicide & Crisis
in multiple countries).314 MHFA was developed for Lifeline, and Crisis Text Line provide crisis
community members, and tMHFA was adapted response intervention. An evaluation of the Lifeline
specifically for adolescents. Both programs focus on effectiveness to prevent suicide included 1,085
reducing stigmatizing attitudes and increasing mental suicidal individuals who called the hotline and
health literacy.314 In addition, tMHFA promotes completed a standard risk assessment for suicide
60 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

and 380 of those people who completed a follow- messages inspiring hope are also included. Patients
up assessment between 1 and 52 days after who used the Jaspr Health app reported significant
their call (mean = 13.5 days). Researchers found decreases in distress and agitation and significant
that over half of the initial sample were seriously increases in learning to cope effectively with current
considering suicide and had a suicide plan when they and future suicidal thoughts compared with patients
called. Significant decreases in psychological pain, who received care as usual.322 Emerging literature
hopelessness, and intent to die occurred during the suggests that opportunities to offer personalized and
phone call, with sustained decreases in psychological just-in-time interventions when it is most needed to
pain and hopelessness up to three weeks later.319 prevent the escalation of potentially dangerous and
These results are promising and underscore the lethal suicidal behaviors may become more common
importance of continued care following the call.319,320 as wearables and mobile devices work together to
It is unclear whether these services lead to increased monitor key risk variables in real time.323
use of treatment services or reduced future suicidal
thoughts and behaviors.302 Plan for safety and follow-up after
an attempt
There is emerging literature on crisis response
services that utilize mobile technology to provide Interventions that support engagement and
real-time crisis support. Two examples include the safety during care transitions are critical to suicide
Virtual Hope Box (VHB) and Jaspr Health. VHB is prevention. The Action Alliance outlines comprehensive
a smartphone application that: best practices in care transitions for individuals with
suicide risk. Safety planning is one example of
reminds individuals of positive experiences,
reminds individuals about reasons for living
(such as messages from loved ones),
provides contact information for people who care
about them and are available in a time of crisis, and
supports coping resources (such as relaxation
exercises).
A randomized controlled trial with veterans who
experienced suicidal ideation and who used VHB for
12 weeks reported significantly greater improvements
in their ability to cope with unpleasant emotions
when compared with their peers who received printed
materials about coping with suicidal thoughts.321
Jaspr Health is a tablet-based application that delivers
four evidence-based practices through an artificial
intelligence-powered virtual guide to acutely suicidal
individuals in an emergency department. The virtual
guide conducts a comprehensive suicide assessment,
discusses the importance of lethal means safety,
and generates a crisis stabilization plan with the
patient. Psychoeducation videos delivered by people
with lived experience on what to expect in the
emergency department and when returning home,
coping with shame, strategies for staying well, and
IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK 61

proactive planning. Safety planning involves outlining on reattempts beyond 12 months has not yet been
what to do during a crisis, including steps for demonstrated.303 A randomized controlled trial of
identifying personal warning signs, using coping long-term follow-up contact approaches found that
strategies, activating social support, and accessing patients who refused ongoing care but who were
professional services. The effectiveness of safety randomized to be contacted by letter four times
planning was examined through a randomized per year had a lower rate of suicide over two years
controlled trial of active-duty soldiers at risk for suicide. of follow-up than patients in the control group who
Soldiers who received a crisis response plan (a form of received no further contact.326 Other studies have
safety planning) experienced faster reduction in also indicated that post-crisis letters, coping cards,
suicidal ideation and were significantly less likely to telephone calls, and text messages were protective
make a suicide attempt during a six-month follow-up against suicidal ideation, attempts, and suicide
period than soldiers who received treatment as (studies from U.S., Iran, Taiwan, and France).304,327-331
usual.324 Safety planning is a key component of the
An accumulating number of brief contact
Safety Planning Intervention with structured
interventions have shown effectiveness. The
follow-up (SPI+) that is widely used across the
Emergency Department Safety Assessment and
Veterans Health Administration. SPI+ combines
Follow-up Evaluation (ED-SAFE) is a brief intervention
strategies for reducing suicidal behavior including
initiated by the emergency department staff that
coping strategies and counseling to reduce access to
takes place during and after a visit related to suicidal
lethal means with a minimum of two follow-up
ideation or attempt. The intervention consisted of
telephone calls. Patients who presented to Veterans
a suicide risk screening by emergency department
Affairs emergency departments for suicide-related
physicians, suicide prevention resources including
concerns and received SPI+ were half as likely to
a personalized safety plan, and a series of telephone
exhibit suicidal behavior and more than twice as
calls to the individual for one year after the visit. In a
likely to attend treatment during a six-month follow-
clinical trial evaluating the effect of the intervention,
up period compared with patients who received
suicide risk detection almost doubled because of
care as usual.325
suicide risk screening. Participants who received the
Follow-up contact and brief contact interventions intervention had 30% fewer suicide attempts than
are two examples of proactive and ongoing outreach participants who received treatment as usual.332,333
approaches. Follow-up contact strategies use postcards, Collectively, these findings highlight the utility of a
letters, text messages, and telephone calls to express multi-component screening and intervention for
care and support for patients and typically invite preventing suicide in emergency department settings.
patients to reconnect with their provider. Contacts
Attempted Suicide Short Intervention Program
are made periodically. This could be monthly or every
is another brief intervention that provides a
few months in the first 12 months after discharge
combination of many strategies including three
with some programs continuing contact for two
in-person therapy sessions, safety planning, and
or more years.303 One meta-analysis examining
regular letters across 24 months. Results of a
interventions to prevent repeat suicide attempts in
randomized controlled trial of the program in
patients admitted after an emergency department
Switzerland indicated recipients had an 80% reduced
visit for a suicide attempt found reductions in
risk of suicide reattempts and 72% fewer days of
reattempts by approximately 17% for up to 12 months
hospitalization when compared with individuals in
after discharge. The effects of these approaches
the control group.334,335
62 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Patients who presented to Veterans
Affairs emergency departments for
suicide-related concerns and received
Safety Planning Intervention were half
as likely to exhibit suicidal behavior.
63

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
is a well-studied form of
psychotherapy that focuses on
changing patients’ thoughts and
Another example of evidenced-based therapeutic
behaviors, which reciprocally
approaches is Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT).338
influence the other. DBT is a multi-component therapy for individuals who
may struggle with impulsivity and regulating emotions.
The components of DBT include individual therapy,
group skills training, between-session telephone
coaching, and a therapy consultation team. A
Provide therapeutic approaches
randomized controlled trial of women with recent
Improving Mood—Promoting Access to suicidal or self-injurious behavior found those receiving
Collaborative Treatment (IMPACT) and Prevention DBT were half as likely to make a suicide attempt
of Suicide in Primary Care Elderly: Collaborative at the two-year follow-up than women receiving
Trial (PROSPECT) are two collaborative care programs community treatment (23% vs. 46%, respectively)
designed to prevent suicide among older primary care and had fewer hospitalizations for suicidal ideation.339
patients by reducing suicidal ideation and depression. Similar findings were documented among adolescents
IMPACT and PROSPECT create a therapeutic alliance receiving DBT following a recent suicide attempt.
that includes a combination of evidenced-based Adolescents who received DBT reported significantly
medication or psychosocial treatments and proactive lower levels of suicidal ideation and fewer suicide
follow-up by a depression care manager throughout attempts during the six-month treatment period
treatment.289,336 Both programs have shown significant than did those who received individual and group
quality of life improvements and reduced functional supportive therapy. At the 12-month follow-up,
impairment, depression, and suicidal ideation over 24 there were no significant group differences because
months of follow-up relative to patients who received adolescents in the latter group also reported fewer
care as usual.289,336,337 suicide attempts over time.340
64 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

SAFETY is another DBT-informed cognitive (CBT-SP) and Brief CBT (BCBT), are examples of CBT
behavioral family treatment approach that focuses approaches that were tailored to meet the needs
on strengthening protective supports within the of individuals who have recently attempted suicide.
family and other social systems, skill building that CBT-SP uses a risk-reduction, relapse-prevention
leads to safer behavioral reactions to stressors, approach that includes safety plan development,
means reduction, and safety planning. Adolescents skill building, psychoeducation, and an analysis
with recent suicide attempts who participated of proximal risk factors and stressors such as
in SAFETY were significantly less likely to report relationship problems and school- or work-related
experiencing a suicide attempt over the course difficulties leading up to and following the suicide
of treatment compared with enhanced treatment attempt. CBT-SP also has family skill modules focused
as usual.341 on family support and communication patterns as
well as improving the family’s problem-solving skills.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy is a well-studied
A randomized controlled trial of CBT-SP found that
form of psychotherapy that focuses on changing
10-session outpatient cognitive therapy designed to
patients’ thoughts and behaviors, which reciprocally
prevent repeat suicide attempts resulted in a 50%
influence the other. A systematic review of 10
reduction in the likelihood of a suicide reattempt
randomized controlled trials from multiple countries
among adults who had been admitted to an
that compared CBT to treatment as usual among
emergency department for a suicide attempt relative
individuals who recently engaged in a suicide attempt
to treatment as usual.343 BCBT is a brief version of
found that CBT reduced the risk of repeated suicide
CBT that is focused on skill development and internal
attempts by half.342 Two programs, Cognitive
self-management. Soldiers who recently attempted
Behavior Therapy for Suicide Prevention
IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK 65

suicide or experienced suicidal ideation and Future Directions
participated in 12 BCBT sessions were 60% less
likely to attempt suicide during the two years
Several promising approaches are on the horizon
following treatment than their peers who received
in addition to the practices described above.
treatment as usual.344 Problem Solving Therapy
Help-seeking is a key protective factor for suicide
(PST) is a form of CBT that has been shown to reduce
that needs additional research. More research is
suicidal ideation and hopelessness among individuals
needed on policies and practices that help reduce
experiencing depression and distress related to
stigma associated with seeking or receiving help and
problem-solving skills.345,346
that protect individuals, like the ability to maintain
employment.
Collaborative Assessment and Management
of Suicidality (CAMS) is another therapeutic
Standardized tools such as self-report questionnaires
framework for guiding suicide-focused assessment
or clinician-administered interviews can help mental
and treatment. The intervention’s flexible approach
health professionals, medical personnel, and others
can be used across treatment settings and clinicians’
identify and evaluate people at risk. Suicide risk
theoretical orientations. It involves the clinician and
screening and assessment are two different methods
patient working together in an interactive assessment
that should be administered sequentially. Screening
process to develop patient-specific treatment plans.
is a method used to rapidly identify someone who
Sessions are collaborative and involve continual
needs further evaluation. Assessment is a more
patient input about what is and is not working to
comprehensive evaluation to confirm risk, estimate
enhance the therapeutic alliance and increase
immediate danger to the individual, and guide next
treatment motivation in the suicidal patient. There
steps. Suicide screening may be applied either
are five published randomized controlled trials of
universally or selectively. Universal screening applies
CAMS (U.S. and Denmark) in which suicidal individuals
to everyone in large settings such as K–12 schools and
were randomly assigned to CAMS or comparison
colleges or correctional facilities, regardless of risk.
treatments.347-351 Improvements were observed
Universal screening may also occur as part of routine
across both treatment groups. However, replicated
healthcare in primary care settings or emergency
CAMS results show significant reductions in suicidal
departments. Selective screening may be conducted in
ideation, overall symptom distress, depression, and
mental health settings or in emergency departments
hopelessness relative to comparison care. There are
when individuals are experiencing a mental health
promising data for decreasing suicide attempts and
crisis. Toolkits for guiding implementation of screening
self-harm (Denmark),349 and a meta-analysis of nine
programs are available from Zero Suicide and the
CAMS trials shows that CAMS is a well-supported
National Institute of Mental Health.
intervention for suicidal ideation (U.S. and multiple
countries).352 CAMS is currently being evaluated as The Ask Suicide-Screening Questions,356 Patient Safety
part of a systems-level approach to reducing suicide Screener-3,357 Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale,358
risk within a National Health Service clinic that and Concise Health Risk Tracking Self-Report359 are
serves a population of 158,000 people in the United brief, validated, and commonly used tools to screen
Kingdom.353 Efforts are also underway to develop for suicide risk. They can be used in a wide range
versions of CAMS to support teenagers at high risk for of settings including primary care, emergency
suicide (CAMS-4Teens), children at high risk for suicide departments, and mental health settings. Individual
(CAMS-4Kids), and their families.354 Additionally, tools are not sufficiently accurate predictors of
V-CAMS is a virtual version that uses a patient-facing suicide risk and should only be used as part of a
avatar and electronic caring contacts to facilitate wider comprehensive assessment according to the
best-practice suicide prevention interventions.355 reserach.360,361 Some tools do screen for a broader
66 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

set of suicide risk factors and may also provide
valuable information about risk for suicidal ideation
and attempts. The Convergent Functional Information be recognized.52,363,364 Applying machine learning to
for Suicidality (CFI-S) 22-item checklist has shown electronic health records has the potential to improve
moderate to high sensitivity and specificity. It risk detection, but these methods are currently not
outperforms physicians’ predictive ratings of repeat being routinely implemented in clinical settings.
visits to the emergency department and completed
Ongoing efforts to provide more effective support and
suicides during a six-month follow-up period.362
treatment for individuals at risk of suicide include the
Emerging efforts to improve risk identification involve 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, mobile and community
techniques such as machine learning and artificial crisis response teams, and continued adaptation of
intelligence to analyze medical records and other therapeutic approaches for specific groups. Mobile
information to identify people at risk for suicide. and community crisis teams consists of mental health
Advances in predictive computer modeling show professionals who provide crisis services as well as
promising methods for using readily available data follow-up stabilization services. These teams will
(such as those available in electronic health records) travel to homes and community locations to help an
to detect populations at risk who might not otherwise individual experiencing a crisis.
IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK 67

Lessen Harms
and Prevent
Future Risk

Rationale
Millions of people are bereaved by suicide every year.3,60 Risk of suicide can
increase among people who have lost a friend or peer, family member, coworker,
or other close contact to suicide.365 We need better understanding of the potential
long-term effects among survivors. Public messaging and media reporting also
play an important role in preventing and reducing future suicide risk. Suicide-
related media campaigns, for example, intend to prevent suicide by promoting
resiliency and encouraging help-seeking behaviors. Research also suggests that
media reports following a suicide that include exposure to sensationalized or
otherwise uninformed reporting can inadvertently contribute to what is known
as suicide contagion.366-368 The Suicide Prevention Resource Center provides a
comprehensive set of resources including materials, programs, and trainings to
help communities support the needs of survivors of suicide loss. Awareness and
Public messaging compassionate care for the bereaved is critical.
about suicide
Approaches
prevention is a key
communication
Two approaches that can lessen harms and prevent future risk of suicide include
strategy for postvention and safe reporting and messaging about suicide.
educating
Intervene after a suicide
individuals about
Postvention happens after a suicide has taken place. It is an important preventive
warning signs measure that may reduce future suicide risk by proactively and comprehensively
supporting the needs of loss survivors. Postvention efforts may involve key partners
and resources
in the community such as first responders, mental health and healthcare providers,
available to help social service providers, local and indigenous leaders, and persons with lived
experience. Postvention may include debriefing sessions, counseling, and/or
individuals at risk
bereavement support groups for surviving friends, family members, or other
for suicide. close contacts.
Report and message about suicide safely
Public messaging about suicide prevention is a key communication strategy
for educating individuals about warning signs and resources available to help
individuals at risk for suicide before a crisis occurs. Safe messaging emphasizes
that suicide is preventable and promotes actions and resources for prevention.
Safe reporting following a suicide is critical. Reporting that sensationalizes suicide
or glamorizes the person who died by suicide and the venue in which suicide is
communicated (like during school assemblies) can heighten the risk of suicide
among at-risk individuals and can inadvertently contribute to suicide contagion.369
LESSEN HARMS AND PREVENT FUTURE RISK 69

Potential Outcomes the importance of accessing postvention services at
the time of, or soon after, experiencing the death of a
loved one by suicide.
Potential outcomes include
reductions in: Two other programs show initial promise for reducing
suicidal ideation and/or suicide attempts among
suicidal ideation,
bereaved individuals and families: Complicated Grief
suicide attempts,
Treatment and the Family Bereavement Program
suicide rates,
(FBP). Neither program was designed to address the
psychological distress, and
needs of suicide survivors, but initial evidence suggests
contagion effects related to suicide.
they can reduce suicidal ideation and suicide attempts
Other potential outcomes include improvements in
among people who have experienced the death of a
public perceptions about suicide and media reporting
loved one by suicide. Complicated Grief Treatment is
following a suicide.
a short-term therapy that focuses on understanding
and resolving grief complications and promoting
Evidence resilience. Thoughts of suicide were reduced from
52% before treatment to 9% after treatment among
individuals bereaved by suicide loss.372 FBP promotes
Current evidence suggests that postvention and
the resilience of children who have lost a parent to
safe reporting and messaging can impact risk and
suicide and includes a component for caregivers
protective factors for suicide.
that teaches positive parenting and a component for
children that focuses on effective coping skills. The
Intervene after a suicide
long-term effectiveness of FBP was documented in one
The StandBy Support After Suicide (StandBy) is study. It reports significantly less suicidal ideation and
one example of a postvention program that shows fewer suicide attempts at 6-year and 15-year follow-
initial promise of reducing risk factors for suicide. ups among children who participated in FBP when
StandBy provides clients with face-to-face outreach, compared with a group of children who have lost a
telephone support, and referrals to additional parent to suicide but did not participate in FBP.272
community services matched to their needs through
Additional research suggests that there are benefits
a professional crisis response team. Site coordinators
when active postvention approaches occur at the
develop customized case management plans and
scene of a suicide. They are associated with intake
refer clients to other existing community services
into treatment sooner, greater attendance at support
as needed.370 A StandBy study in Australia found
group meetings, and attendance at more meetings
that clients were significantly less likely to be at
when compared with passive postvention such as
high risk for suicidal ideation and attempts than a
approaches where survivors self-refer for services.373
suicide-bereaved comparison group that had not
been involved with the StandBy program (48% and
Report and message about
64%, respectively).370 The effectiveness of StandBy
suicide safely
at reducing suicidality was replicated in a later study
in Australia but only for clients bereaved by suicide One way to ensure safe reporting about suicide is to
within the last 12 months.371 Individuals who received encourage news media to adhere to Recommendations
StandBy services within 12 months of experiencing a for Reporting on Suicide. The most compelling
loss to suicide were also less likely to experience social evidence supporting these recommendations for
loneliness when compared with bereaved individuals reporting comes from Austria. Media guidelines were
who did not use StandBy. These findings underscore introduced after a sharp increase in suicides on the
70 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Postvention is an important
preventive measure that
may reduce future suicide
risk by proactively and
reporting is especially important when covering
comprehensively supporting
celebrity suicides because the public may be more
the needs of loss survivors.
likely to identify with individuals of high social
standing.374 Research suggests that sensationalist
media reports have harmful effects on suicide, but
Viennese subway, and an interrupted time-series reporting on positive coping skills in the face of
design was used to evaluate the guidelines’ national adversity can demonstrate protective effects against
impact on subsequent suicides. Changes in the quality suicide (U.S. and multiple countries).375 Reports of
and quantity of media reporting in Austria resulted in individual suicidal ideation along with reports
a nationwide significant reduction of 81 suicides describing a “mastery” of a crisis situation where
annually.366 A systematic review and meta-analysis, adversities were overcome was associated with
which included the U.S. and multiple other countries, significant decreases in suicide rates in the period
indicated that following guidelines for responsible immediately following such reports.375
LESSEN HARMS AND PREVENT FUTURE RISK 71

72 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Future Directions
occurs.377 Media campaigns often focus on the public’s
perceptions about suicide by providing information
There is an ongoing need to adopt and evaluate regarding warning signs and resources and
public health approaches to postvention that are encouraging help-seeking behaviors. Preliminary
culturally sensitive and tailored to meet the needs of evidence from two systematic reviews link media
individuals and communities affected by suicide loss. campaigns to modest improvements in knowledge,
Comprehensive postvention responses that recognize beliefs, and attitudes toward suicide.377,378 However,
both the immediate and long-term effects of suicide some research has found negative impacts associated
loss are needed to reduce risk and promote healing. with campaigns.377 These mixed results, and even
potential for harm, strongly suggest that media
The Action Alliance Survivors of Suicide Loss Task
campaigns are most effective when they are delivered
Force developed guidelines to help communities
as part of a multi-component approach to suicide
and organizations provide immediate and effective
prevention. They are more effective when they also
services and support to everyone who is affected
incorporate active engagement strategies, like lectures
by suicide. The guidelines are based on a social-
or face-to-face distribution of promotional materials,
ecological approach and are intended to promote
versus relying on incidental exposure to passive media
compassionate and integrated postvention efforts
platforms such billboards and radio or television
across all levels of society. National guidelines are
advertisements (studies from multiple countries).377
relevant to broader communities and organizations,
but there are resources for smaller groups of The Action Alliance developed a framework for safe
people too. After a Suicide: A Toolkit for Schools messaging and recommendations for news and
is a postvention toolkit that offers comprehensive, entertainment media on depicting suicide. These
practice-informed, and evidence-based guidance resources can help all sectors of the community
tailored to the specific needs of school communities develop messages that are strategic, safe, positive,
when responding to and managing the detrimental and based on best practices. Engaging all sectors of
effects of suicide. These resources have not been communities in understanding and implementing
evaluated for their impact on suicide, attempts, or safe messaging about suicide may prevent future
ideation, but they may reduce the effects of trauma risk. These guidelines can be applied to all forms of
including feelings of guilt, distress, depression, and communication such as casual conversations, formal
complicated grief.371,376 meetings, and traditional and social media platforms.
More research is needed on how these guidelines are
Improved and consistent adherence to safe messaging
implemented in different settings and for diverse
recommendations across all forms of media is another
audiences.
area for future directions and research. Suicide
prevention media campaigns, for example, are an We can save lives and offer hope and healing by using
evolving and popular approach intended to reduce the best available evidence and working to build out
risk of suicide by reaching individuals before crisis future directions with robust evaluation.
LESSEN HARMS AND PREVENT FUTURE RISK 73

Collaboration
and Partnerships

A comprehensive approach to suicide prevention extends beyond primary
and behavioral healthcare settings to all places where people live, work, study,
worship, and play. Communities can achieve this by creating partnerships to
share the responsibility and investment in suicide prevention. Collaborations can
also create meaningful linkages across public health, mental health, primary care,
and other sectors.
The Role of Public Health
Public health can play an important and unique role in comprehensive suicide
prevention. Public health agencies bring critical leadership to suicide prevention
for broad population-level impact. The public health approach uses data to define
the problem, science to determine what works for prevention, and widespread
adoption of effective programs, practices, and policies with a particular focus
Integrating and
on upstream prevention that seeks to prevent suicide risk in the first place. To
coordinating
carry out this approach, public health professionals serve as conveners of multi-
prevention sectoral partnerships that together use data and the best available evidence
to plan, prioritize, and coordinate suicide prevention efforts in state, territorial,
activities across
local, and tribal communities, with a focus on populations disproportionately
sectors and affected by suicide. Public health collects and disseminates data and prevention
information, implements and evaluates preventive measures, and tracks and
settings can
monitors prevention progress for continuous quality improvement.
expand the reach
and impact of Partners and People with
suicide prevention Vested Interest
efforts.
The strategies and approaches outlined in this Prevention Resource cannot
be accomplished by the public health sector alone, nor can suicide prevention
rely solely on the mental health system, which touches some but not all of the
strategies described in this resource. Integrating and coordinating prevention
activities across sectors and settings (see National Strategy for Suicide Prevention1)
can expand the reach and impact of suicide prevention efforts. The following
list describes some of the vital partners needed to implement the strategies and
approaches in this resource, along with examples of the types of roles they can
play in preventing suicide.
Community members, including individuals with lived experience are
essential, and it is important that they are involved at every stage of the
planning and implementation process. Those who are directly impacted by
suicide have firsthand experience and can contribute ideas for how to prevent it.
Individuals from populations disproportionately affected by suicide offer
vital expertise for preventing suicide. Collaborating with representatives and
leaders from diverse backgrounds is particularly important to disrupt patterns
COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS 75

of inequity and help ensure relevance and reach. suicide. Government agencies can implement
Also consider engaging non-traditional partners programs and policies that improve housing
who have rapport in particular communities. stability, economic security, and care access and
delivery. Public health and other governmental
Non-governmental and community-based
agencies can work together to establish policies
organizations often serve as points of connection
and support practices that create protective
and engagement across the populations they serve.
environments where people live, work, and play.
They can identify people at risk and coordinate
across organizations to provide supportive services. Social services can collaborate with the health,
Community organizations can deliver programs education, and justice sectors to support individuals
such as those that promote healthy norms at high risk for suicide and their families, improve
and teach coping skills. They can leverage their access to care, and coordinate service provision
connections to increase awareness of, and garner with community organizations. This could include
support for, policies that help reduce suicide on a public agencies and departments at the county and
broader scale. They can also create safe spaces for municipal level.
community members to grieve and process their
Health and behavioral healthcare insurers,
experience following a suicide in the community,
providers, and health systems can implement
which can lessen harms and prevent future risk.
programs and policies that improve access and
Education systems can implement and evaluate delivery of suicide care. The health sector is
policies and practices geared toward creating safe, well-positioned to identify and support people at
healthy, and supportive classroom environments. risk through activities delivered in hospital, primary
Schools can teach coping and problem-solving skills care, behavioral healthcare, and community settings
and promote healthy connections through healthy that require the expertise of professionals who
peer norms and community engagement activities. are licensed and trained to deliver intensive critical
intervention support. Clinicians can help reduce
Local, state, and federal government are
access to lethal means among people at risk of
especially important in addressing underlying
suicide through education and counseling.
environmental contexts that increase the risk for
76 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Businesses can implement programs and policies These groups can work together to prevent suicide
that strengthen household financial security. by impacting the various contexts and underlying
They can also partner with public health entities risks that contribute to suicide. Suicide prevention
to establish policies and practices that create efforts can involve partners in a wide variety of
protective workplace environments. configurations. The list of partners and sample roles
provided above is not meant to be exhaustive.
Housing authorities and agencies can adopt
policies that prevent homelessness and minimize Many states and communities already have strategic
eviction and foreclosure. Affordable housing plans for suicide prevention, as well as coalitions and
advocates can promote a range of policies to task forces in place that engage these partners.379
improve housing stability, alleviate financial strain, The Action Alliance is a cross-sector, public-private
and decrease risk of suicide. Supportive housing partnership that brings together federal agencies*
providers can ensure strong linkages to care and with the private sector† and the nonprofit sector
promote healthy connections among residents, to implement the National Strategy for Suicide
their families, and community. Prevention and the Surgeon General’s Call to Action.
News media can lessen harms and prevent future The summary table in the Appendix notes sectors that
risk by promoting help-seeking and following may be well-positioned to lead implementation efforts
responsible reporting guidelines, including when within the strategies and approaches described in
communicating information on a recent suicide to this document. All sectors can play an important and
the public. influential role in preventing the risk of suicide in the
first place and lessening the immediate and long-term
Policymakers can advance changes in policies,
harms of suicidal behavior by helping those in times
systems, and environments that will help reduce
of crisis get the services and support they need.
suicide. This includes strengthening economic
supports, improving access to and delivery of
suicide care, and creating protective environments.
Complementary resources:
First responders can identify those at risk and
The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to
connect them to support.
Implement the National Strategy for Suicide
Foundations can support comprehensive action Prevention.
across strategies and fund evaluation efforts to
The National Strategy for Suicide Prevention
expand the evidence base, with flexibility in funded
outlines sample actions that various sectors,
approaches to encourage cultural responsiveness
levels of government, organizations, individuals,
and adaptation. Funders can structure initiatives to
and families can take to prevent suicide.
include time for thorough planning and partnership
building that foster collaboration.
* Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Health Resources and Services Administration, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, National Institute of Mental Health, Department of Defense, Indian Health Services, Office of Self
Governance – Department of the Interior, Department of Justice, Department of Homeland Security
† Construction, healthcare, news media, sport, entertainment, finance, forestry, etc.
COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS 77

Monitoring and
Evaluation

Monitoring and evaluation are necessary components of a public health
approach to preventing suicide. Prevention efforts require timely and reliable
data to monitor the extent of the problem and evaluate the impact. Data are
also necessary for prevention planning and implementation to understand what
works and does not work to address risk factors, reinforce protective factors,
and decrease suicide rates.
Gathering ongoing, uniform, and consistent data across systems is important.
Consistent data allow public health and other entities to better gauge the
scope of the problem, identify groups at high risk, and monitor the effects of
prevention policies and programs. It is common for different sectors, agencies,
and organizations to employ varying definitions of suicidal ideation, behavior, and
death that can make it difficult to consistently monitor specific outcomes across
sectors and over time. For example, the manner in which deaths are classified can
change from one jurisdiction to another or based on local medical and/or medico-
Consistent data
legal standards.380
allow public health
and other entities Monitoring Resources
to better gauge
Surveillance systems exist at the federal, state, and local levels. A list of available
the scope of the
data sources for suicide prevention can be found on CDC’s Suicide Prevention
problem, identify website. It is important to assess the availability of surveillance data and data
systems across these levels to identify and address gaps in the systems. CDC’s
groups at high
National Vital Statistics System data, with data available at WISQARSTM and CDC
risk, and monitor WONDER381 and the National Violent Death Reporting System,382 are examples of
surveillance systems that provide data on deaths from suicide. The National Vital
the effects of
Statistics System is a nationwide surveillance system that collects demographic,
prevention policies geographic, and cause-of-death data from death certificates.381 The National
Violent Death Reporting System is a state-based surveillance system (currently in
and programs.
all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico) that combines data from
death certificates, law enforcement reports, and coroner or medical examiner
reports to provide detailed information on the circumstances of violent deaths,
including suicide, which can assist communities in guiding prevention activities.382
Data from state and local Child Death Review Teams383 and Suicide Death Review
Teams (in a few states) offer another source to identify deaths and obtain insight
into the gaps in services, systems, and modifiable risk factors for suicide.
The National Electronic Injury Surveillance System-All Injury Program provides
nationally representative data about all types and causes of nonfatal injuries
treated in a subset of U.S. hospital emergency departments and can be used to
assess national rates of, and trends in, self-harm injuries by cause, age, race and
ethnicity, sex, and disposition.9
CDC’s National Syndromic Surveillance Program has additional information
regarding suicidal behavior from electronic patient encounter data obtained from
MONITORING AND EVALUATION 79

emergency departments, urgent and ambulatory International Classification of Diseases, Tenth
care centers, inpatient healthcare settings, and Revision–Clinical Modification coded administrative
laboratories.384 Emergency department syndromic data can provide a means to monitor suicide deaths,
surveillance data contains information on suicidal nonfatal suicide attempts, and instances of intentional
ideation and suspected suicide attempts that can be self-harm through claims and encounter data.390
analyzed by age, sex, and geographic location. It can International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
provide timely information on trends which can be suicide-related codes are distinct from mental
used to support targeted public health investigation health-related codes and provide information about
and response.87,385-387 The program can be particularly manner of death or method of injury via external
helpful as an early warning system for upticks in cause codes. Administrative data sets can vary in
suicide-related outcomes in general, and during quality and completeness, particularly external cause
times of community infrastructure disruptions, codes. There is a federal requirement for healthcare
such as pandemics, economic recessions, and providers to include diagnosis codes when submitting
natural disasters. claims for reimbursement, but inclusion of external
cause codes is voluntary.391 Administrative data can
Some surveillance systems provide national, state,
also be used to evaluate prevention efforts.
and some local estimates of suicidal behavior and
suicide risk and protective factors. The Youth Risk The Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP)
Behavior Surveillance System collects information is a collection of healthcare databases that provides
from a nationally representative sample of 9th–12th- longitudinal all-payer encounter-level data for hospital
grade students. It is a key resource in monitoring inpatient care, outpatient emergency department
health risk behaviors among youth. It includes care, and ambulatory surgery from hospital-owned
information about youth who have seriously facilities. HCUP data can provide national-level trend
considered attempting suicide, attempted suicide, data on emergency department visits related to
made a plan, or required treatment by a doctor or suicidal ideation or suicide attempt.392,393 It can also
nurse for a suicide attempt that resulted in an injury, be used within states to understand the prevalence
poisoning, or overdose.388 The data are obtained from of suicide attempts requiring hospitalizations by
a national school-based survey conducted by CDC as geographic regions.
well as from state, territorial, tribal, and large urban
school district surveys conducted by education and
Evaluation
health agencies.388 The National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (NSDUH)389 is an annual survey of the
civilian, non-institutionalized population ages 12 It is important to address gaps in responses, track
years and older. NSDUH provides data on: progress of prevention efforts, and evaluate the
impact of those efforts to improve the quality of
national and state-level estimates of substance
suicide prevention programming and/or to eliminate
use such as alcohol, tobacco, illicit drugs, and
non-effective strategies or activities. Evaluation data
nonmedical use of prescription drugs,
are essential to understand what does and does not
mental health, such as past year mental illness
work to reduce suicide rates and the associated risk
and co-occurring illnesses,
and protective factors at the individual, relationship,
service utilization, and
community, and societal levels. Theories of change
suicidal ideation, suicide plans, and
and logic models that identify short-, intermediate-,
suicide attempts.
and long-term outcomes are an important part of
NSDUH is a key resource to track trends in suicide-
program evaluation.
related risk factors in the population and to help
identify groups at increased risk.389
80 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Evaluation data are essential
to understand what does
and does not work to reduce
strategies (upstream before risk occurs) and
suicide rates and the associated
community-level strategies to prevent suicide at
risk and protective factors at the population level. Testing the effectiveness of
the strategies and approaches in this resource
the individual, relationship,
could include evaluating how the strategies
community, and societal levels. interact, identifying the barriers and facilitators
to successful strategy implementation, and the
impact of key contextual factors, policies, and
partnerships on strategy implementation and
The evidence base for suicide prevention has advanced effectiveness. Most existing evaluations focus on
greatly over the last few decades. However, we approaches implemented in isolation, but there
need more information on the impacts of policies, is potential to understand the synergistic effects
programs, and practices on suicide and suicide within a comprehensive prevention approach.
attempts. This work needs to go beyond merely CDC’s Comprehensive Suicide Prevention Program
examining their effectiveness on risk factors. seeks to understand these synergies as states and
Research can inform knowledge gaps about the communities implement multiple strategies and
long-term effectiveness of primary prevention approaches from this resource.
MONITORING AND EVALUATION 81

Conclusion

Suicide is a serious but preventable1,2 public health problem that can have lasting
impacts and ripple effects that are far-reaching. Each of us likely interacts every
day with suicide survivors; those with lived experience; and those with thoughts
of suicide either at home, at work, or in our communities. Suicide rates have
declined in the past two years,7 but multiple barriers have impeded progress.
Barriers include adequate resources and capacity to carry out the work and stigma
related to help-seeking, mental illness, and being a survivor. The good news is that
suicide as a preventable public health problem is garnering attention, particularly
in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. We now have the Surgeon General’s
Call to Action to implement the National Strategy for Suicide Prevention and the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Behavioral Health Coordinating
Each of us
Council and its subcommittee on Suicide Prevention and Crisis Care. Many other
likely interacts expanded efforts such as the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline are underway.
every day with This Prevention Resource includes strategies and approaches designed to be used
as part of a comprehensive approach to suicide prevention. Such an approach
suicide survivors;
starts with convening, connecting, and communicating with multi-sectoral
those with lived partners. It relies on quality data for decision-making; leveraging existing suicide
prevention programming in communities; implementing and evaluating multiple
experience;
strategies and approaches with the best available evidence as found in this
and those with document; and communicating lessons learned, progress, and success stories.
This Prevention Resource addresses multiple risk and protective factors at the
thoughts of
individual, relationship, community, and societal levels. It includes strategies and
suicide either approaches to prevent the risk of suicide in the first place, as well as strategies
focused on lessening the immediate and long-term harms of suicidal behavior.
at home, at
It also includes strategies that range from a focus on the whole population
work, or in our regardless of risk to strategies designed to support people at highest risk.
Importantly, this Prevention Resource extends the bounds of typical prevention
communities.
strategies to consider approaches that go beyond individual behavior change to
better address risk factors impacting communities and populations more broadly
such as economic policies to strengthen housing and financial security.
The collection of policies, programs, and practices described in this resource can
be implemented now while the evidence base continues to emerge. Monitoring
and evaluation play a key role in that implementation. In closing, we hope that
this resource supports states and communities as you work to prevent suicide,
and as we work together, knowing that hope, help, and healing are possible.
CONCLUSION 83

References
1. U.S. Office of the Surgeon General, National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention. 2012 National Strategy for Suicide
Prevention: Goals and Objectives for Action. Washington, D.C.: HHS; 2012.
2. U.S. Office of the Surgeon General, National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention. The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to
implement the Strategy for Suicide Prevention. HHS; 2021.
3. World Health Organization. Suicide Prevention: A Global Imperative. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2014.
4. Frieden TR. Six Components Necessary for Effective Public Health Program Implementation. Am J Public Health.
2014;104(1):17-22.
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Injury Prevention. Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan FY2020-2022.
2020; Atlanta, GA. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/strategy/index.html.
6. Silverman MM, Maris RW. The Prevention of Suicidal Behaviors: An Overview. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 1995;25(1):10-21.
7. Ehlman D, Yard E, Stone DM, Jones CM, Mack KA. Changes in Suicide Rates — United States, 2019 and 2020. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022;71(8):306-312.
8. Curtin SC, Hedegaard H, Ahmad F. Provisional Numbers and Rates of Suicide by Month and Demographic Characteristics:
United States, 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, 2021.
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. WISQARS (Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System). 2020;
Atlanta, GA. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html.
10. Stone DM, Jones CM, Mack KA. Changes in Suicide Rates - United States, 2018-2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2021;70(8):261-268.
11. Leavitt RA, Ertl A, Sheats K, Petrosky E, Ivey-Stephenson A, Fowler KA. Suicides Among American Indian/Alaska Natives -
National Violent Death Reporting System, 18 States, 2003-2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(8):237-242.
12. Peterson C, Sussell A, Li J, Schumacher PK, Yeoman K, Stone DM. Suicide Rates by Industry and Occupation - National Violent
Death Reporting System, 32 States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(3):57-62.
13. Defense Suicide Prevention Office. DoD CY 2019 Annual Suicide Report. Washington, D.C., 2020.
14. Veterans Health Administration. Veteran Suicide Data and Reporting - Mental Health VA. Washington, D.C. Available at: https://
www.mentalhealth.va.gov/suicide_prevention/data.asp.
15. Ravindran C, Morley SW, Stephens BM, Stanley IH, Reger MA. Association of Suicide Risk With Transition to Civilian Life Among
US Military Service Members. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(9):e2016261.
16. Lindahl V, Pearson JL, Colpe L. Prevalence of Suicidality During Pregnancy and the Postpartum. Arch Womens Ment Health.
2005;8(2):77-87.
17. Yi S, Chang EC, Chang OD, et al. Coping and Suicide in College Students. Crisis. 2021;42(1):5-12.
18. Chung D, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Wang M, Swaraj S, Olfson M, Large M. Meta-analysis of Suicide Rates in the First Week and the First
Month after Psychiatric Hospitalisation. BMJ Open. 2019;9(3):e023883.
19. Admon LK, Dalton VK, Kolenic GE, et al. Trends in Suicidality 1 Year Before and After Birth Among Commercially Insured
Childbearing Individuals in the United States, 2006-2017. JAMA Psychiatry. 2021;78(2):171-176.
20. Crosby AE, Han B, Ortega LA, et al. Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors Among Adults Aged >/=18 Years--United States,
2008-2009. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2011;60(13):1-22.
21. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Highlights for the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.
Rockville, MD. 2021.
22. Lindsey MA, Sheftall AH, Xiao Y, Joe S. Trends of Suicidal Behaviors Among High School Students in the United States:
1991-2017. Pediatrics. 2019;144(5).
23. Ivey-Stephenson AZ, Demissie Z, Crosby AE, et al. Suicidal Ideation and Behaviors Among High School Students - Youth Risk
Behavior Survey, United States, 2019. MMWR Suppl. 2020;69(1):47-55.
24. Reference removed.
84 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

25. Turecki G. Epigenetics and suicidal behavior research pathways. Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(3 Suppl 2):S144-151.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing Suicide Factsheet. 2021. Atlanta, GA. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/suicide/pdf/NCIPC-Suicide-FactSheet-508_FINAL.pdf.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Risk and Protective Factors. Suicide Prevention 2022; Atlanta, GA. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/factors/index.html.
28. Suicide Prevention Resource Center. Risk and Protective Factors. 2020. Oklahoma City, OK. Available at: https://www.sprc.org/
about-suicide/risk-protective-factors.
29. Prevention Institute. Back to our Roots - Community Determinants and Pillars of Wellbeing Advance Resilience and Healing. 2017.
Oakland, CA.
30. Bossarte RM, Karras E, Lu N, et al. Associations Between the Department of Veterans Affairs’ Suicide Prevention Campaign
and Calls to Related Crisis Lines. Public Health Rep. 2014;129(6):516-525.
31. Assari S, Moghani Lankarani M. Violence Exposure and Mental Health of College Students in the United States. Behav Sci
(Basel). 2018;8(6):53.
32. Chapman DP, Whitfield CL, Felitti VJ, Dube SR, Edwards VJ, Anda RF. Adverse Childhood Experiences and the Risk of Depressive
Disorders in Adulthood.JAffectDisord. 2004;82(2):217-225.
33. Dube SR, Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Chapman DP, Williamson DF, Giles WH. Childhood Abuse, Household Dysfunction, and the
Risk of Attempted Suicide Throughout the Life Span: Findings from the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study. JAMA.
2001;286(24):3089-3096.
34. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading
Causes of Death in Adults. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med. 1998;14(4):245-258.
35. Klomek AB, Sourander A, Gould M. The Association of Suicide and Bullying in Childhood to Young Adulthood: A Review of
Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Research Findings. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 2010;55(5):282-288.
36. Leeb RT, Lewis T, Zolotor AJ. A Review of Physical and Mental Health Consequences of Child Abuse and Neglect and
Implications for Practice. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 2011;5(5):454-468.
37. World Health Organization. Global and Regional Estimates of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of
Intimate Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual Violence. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
38. Bellis MA, Hughes K, Leckenby N, et al. Adverse Childhood Experiences and Associations with Health-Harming Behaviours in
Young Adults: Surveys in Eight Eastern European Countries. Bull World Health Organ. 2014;92(9):641-655.
39. Hughes K, Bellis MA, Hardcastle KA, et al. The Effect of Multiple Adverse Childhood Experiences on Health: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Lancet Public Health. 2017;2(8):e356-e366.
40. Metzler M, Merrick MT, Klevens J, Ports KA, Ford DC. Adverse Childhood Experiences and Life Opportunities: Shifting the
Narrative. Children and Youth Services Review. 2017;72:141-149.
41. Font SA, Maguire-Jack K. Pathways From Childhood Abuse and Other Adversities to Adult Health Risks: The Role of Adult
Socioeconomic Conditions. Child Abuse Negl. 2016;51:390-399.
42. Haegerich TM, Dahlberg LL. Violence as a Public Health Risk. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 2011:1559827611409127.
43. Wilkins N, Tsao B, Hertz M, Davis R, Klevens J. Connecting the Dots: An Overview of the Links Among Multiple Forms of
Violence. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 2014.
Atlanta, GA. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/connecting_the_dots-a.pdf.
44. Hamby S, Grych J. The Web of Violence: Exploring Connections Among Different Forms of Interpersonal Violence and Abuse.
In: Briefs in Sociology. New York, NY: Springer; 2013.
45. Kleiman EM, Riskind JH, Schaefer KE, Weingarden H. The Moderating Role of Social Support on the Relationship Between
Impulsivity and Suicide Risk. Crisis. 2012;33(5):273-279.
46. Carter M, McGee R, Taylor B, Williams S. Health Outcomes in Adolescence: Associations With Family, Friends and School
Engagement. J Adolesc. 2007;30(1):51-62.
47. Maimon D, Browning CR, Brooks-Gunn J. Collective Efficacy, Family Attachment, and Urban Adolescent Suicide Attempts.
J Health Soc Behav. 2010;51(3):307-324.
48. Capaldi DM, Knoble NB, Shortt JW, Kim HK. A Systematic Review of Risk Factors for Intimate Partner Violence. Partner Abuse.
2012;3(2):231-280.
REFERENCES 85

49. Losel F, Farrington DP. Direct Protective and Buffering Protective Factors in the Development of Youth Violence. Am J Prev
Med. 2012;43(2 Suppl 1):S8-S23.
50. Wyman PA, Brown CH, LoMurray M, et al. An Outcome Evaluation of the Sources of Strength Suicide Prevention Program
Delivered by Adolescent Peer Leaders in High Schools. Am J Public Health. 2010;100(9):1653-1661.
51. Lynch FL, Peterson EL, Lu CY, et al. Substance Use Disorders and Risk of Suicide in a General US Population: A Case Control
Study. Addict Sci Clin Pract. 2020;15(1):14.
52. Simon GE, Johnson E, Lawrence JM, et al. Predicting Suicide Attempts and Suicide Deaths Following Outpatient Visits Using
Electronic Health Records. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;175(10):951-960.
53. Bohnert KM, Ilgen MA, Louzon S, McCarthy JF, Katz IR. Substance Use Disorders and the Risk of Suicide Mortality Among Men
and Women in the US Veterans Health Administration. Addiction. 2017;112(7):1193-1201.
54. Esang M, Ahmed S. A Closer Look at Substance Use and Suicide. American Journal of Psychiatry Residents’ Journal.
2018;13(6):6-8.
55. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing Adverse Childhood Experiences: Leveraging the Best Available Evidence.
Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2019. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
pdf/preventingACES.pdf
56. National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Survivors of Suicide Loss Task Force. Responding to Grief, Trauma, and Distress
After a Suicide: U.S. National Guidelines. Washington, D.C. 2015.
57. Dunne EJ, McIntosh JL, Dunne-Maxim K, eds. Suicide and Its Aftermath: Understanding and Counseling the Survivors. New York:
Norton; 1987.
58. Mishara BL, ed The Impact of Suicide. New York: Springer; 1995.
59. National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Suicide Attempt Survivors Task Force. The Way Forward: Pathways to Hope,
Recovery, and Wellness With Insights From Lived Experience. Washington, D.C. 2014.
60. Cerel J, Brown MM, Maple M, et al. How Many People Are Exposed to Suicide? Not Six. Suicide Life Threat Behav.
2019;49(2):529-534.
61. Richardson J. Assessing the Economic and Quality of Life Impacts of Grief and Suicide in the United States [Dissertation]. Ann Arbor,
MI, University of Michigan; 2018.
62. Cerel J, Maple M, De Venne A, Moore M, Flaherty C, Brown M. Exposure to Suicide in the Community: Prevalence and
Correlates in One US State. Public Health Rep. 2016;131(1).
63. Stroebe M, Schut H, Stroebe W. Health Outcomes of Bereavement. Lancet. 2007;370(9603):1960-1973.
64. Erlangsen A, Runeson B, Bolton JM, et al. Association Between Spousal Suicide and Mental, Physical, and Social Health
Outcomes: A Longitudinal and Nationwide Register-Based Study. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(5):456-464.
65. Spillane A, Larkin C, Corcoran P, Matvienko-Sikar K, Riordan F, Arensman E. Physical and Psychosomatic Health Outcomes in
People Bereaved by Suicide Compared to People Bereaved by Other Modes of Death: A Systematic Review. BMC Public Health.
2017;17(1):939.
66. Spillane A, Matvienko-Sikar K, Larkin C, Corcoran P, Arensman E. What are the Physical and Psychological Health Effects
of Suicide Bereavement on Family Members? An Observational and Interview Mixed-Methods Study in Ireland. BMJ Open.
2018;8(1):e019472.
67. Tal Young I, Iglewicz A, Glorioso D, et al. Suicide Bereavement and Complicated Grief. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2012;14(2):177-186.
68. Mitchell AM, Kim Y, Prigerson HG, Mortimer-Stephens M. Complicated Grief in Survivors of Suicide. Crisis. 2004;25(1):12-18.
69. Tal I, Mauro C, Reynolds CF, 3rd, et al. Complicated Grief After Suicide Bereavement and Other Causes of Death. Death Stud.
2017;41(5):267-275.
70. Mitchell AM, Terhorst L. PTSD Symptoms in Survivors Bereaved by the Suicide of a Significant Other. J Am Psychiatr Nurses
Assoc. 2017;23(1):61-65.
71. Hanschmidt F, Lehnig F, Riedel-Heller SG, Kersting A. The Stigma of Suicide Survivorship and Related Consequences-A
Systematic Review. PLoS One. 2016;11(9):e0162688.
72. Shields C, Kavanagh M, Russo K. A Qualitative Systematic Review of the Bereavement Process Following Suicide. Omega
(Westport). 2017;74(4):426-454.
86 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

73. Peterson C, Miller GF, Barnett SBL, Florence C. Economic Cost of Injury — United States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2021;70:1655-1659.
74. Peterson C, Luo F, Florence C. State-Level Economic Costs of Fatal Injuries — United States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2021;70:1660-1663.
75. Edwards RW, Jumper-Thurman P, Plested BA, Oetting ER, Swanson L. Community Readiness: Research to Practice. Journal of
community psychology. 2000;28(3):291-307.
76. Hawkins JD, Catalano RF, Kuklinski MR. Communities That Care. In: Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice. Springer;
2014:393-408.
77. Luo F, Florence CS, Quispe-Agnoli M, Ouyang L, Crosby AE. Impact of Business Cycles on US Suicide Rates, 1928-2007. Am J
Public Health. 2011;101(6):1139-1146.
78. National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention. Transforming Communities Key Elements for the Implementation of
Comprehensive Community-Based Suicide Prevention. Washington, D.C., 2017.
79. Suicide Prevention Resource Center. Strategic Planning. Available at: https://sprc.org/effective-prevention/strategic-planning
80. Prevention Institute. Suicide Prevention Modules Institute. 2021; Available at: https://preventioninstitute.org/
suicide-prevention/modules.
81. Reger MA, Stanley IH, Joiner TE. Suicide Mortality and Coronavirus Disease 2019-A Perfect Storm? JAMA Psychiatry.
2020;77(11):1093-1094.
82. Brown S, Schuman DL. Suicide in the Time of COVID-19: A Perfect Storm. J Rural Health. 2021;37(1):211-214.
83. Bastiampillai T, Allison S, Looi JCL, Licinio J, Wong ML, Perry SW. The COVID-19 Pandemic and Epidemiologic Insights From
Recession-Related Suicide Mortality. Mol Psychiatry. 2020;25(12):3445-3447.
84. Wasserman IM. The Impact of Epidemic, War, Prohibition and Media on Suicide: United States, 1910-1920. Suicide &
Life-Threatening Behavior. 1992;22(2):240-254.
85. Cheung YT, Chau PH, Yip PS. A Revisit on Older Adults Suicides and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Epidemic in
Hong Kong. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008;23(12):1231-1238.
86. Chang YH, Chang SS, Hsu CY, Gunnell D. Impact of Pandemic on Suicide: Excess Suicides in Taiwan During the 1918-1920
Influenza Pandemic. J Clin Psychiatry. 2020;81(6).
87. Czeisler ME, Lane RI, Petrosky E, et al. Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic -
United States, June 24-30, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(32):1049-1057.
88. Pollard MS, Tucker JS, Green HD, Jr. Changes in Adult Alcohol Use and Consequences During the COVID-19 Pandemic in the
US. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(9):e2022942.
89. Killgore WDS, Cloonan SA, Taylor EC, Lucas DA, Dailey NS. Alcohol Dependence During COVID-19 Lockdowns. Psychiatry Res.
2021;296:113676.
90. Hamm ME, Brown PJ, Karp JF, et al. Experiences of American Older Adults with Pre-existing Depression During the Beginnings
of the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Multicity, Mixed-Methods Study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020;28(9):924-932.
91. Jobes DA, Crumlish JA, Evans AD. The COVID-19 Pandemic and Treating Suicidal Risk: The Telepsychotherapy Use of CAMS.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration. 2020;30(2):226-237.
92. Shore JH, Manson SM. A Developmental Model for Rural Telepsychiatry. Psychiatr Serv. 2005;56(8):976-980.
93. Hilty DM, Ferrer DC, Parish MB, Johnston B, Callahan EJ, Yellowlees PM. The Effectiveness of Telemental Health: A 2013
Review. Telemed J E Health. 2013;19(6):444-454.
94. Rojas SM, Carter SP, McGinn MM, Reger MA. A Review of Telemental Health as a Modality to Deliver Suicide-Specific
Interventions for Rural Populations. Telemed J E Health. 2020;26(6):700-709.
95. Ault A. Kennedy, NIMH Demand Urgent Action on COVID-19 Mental Health Toll. Medscape Medical News 2020.
96. Torguson K. Major Federal Agencies and Private Sector Groups Unite on a Mental Health & Suicide Prevention National
Response to COVID-19. 2020.
97. Fowler KA, Gladden RM, Vagi KJ, Barnes J, Frazier L. Increase in Suicides Associated With Home Eviction and Foreclosure
During the US Housing Crisis: Findings From 16 National Violent Death Reporting System States, 2005-2010. Am J Public Health.
2015;105(2):311-316.
98. Blakely TA, Collings SC, Atkinson J. Unemployment and Suicide. Evidence for a Causal Association? J Epidemiol Community
Health. 2003;57(8):594-600.
REFERENCES 87

99. Nordt C, Warnke I, Seifritz E, Kawohl W. Modelling Suicide and Unemployment: A Longitudinal Analysis Covering 63 Countries,
2000-11. Lancet Psychiatry. 2015;2(3):239-245.
100.Carriere DE, Marshall MI, Binkley JK. Response to Economic Shock: The Impact of Recession on Rural-Urban Suicides in the
United States. J Rural Health. 2019;35(2):253-261.
101.Stack S, Wasserman I. Economic Strain and Suicide Risk: A Qualitative Analysis. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2007;37(1):103-112.
102.Kerr WC, Kaplan MS, Huguet N, Caetano R, Giesbrecht N, McFarland BH. Economic Recession, Alcohol, and Suicide Rates:
Comparative Effects of Poverty, Foreclosure, and Job Loss. Am J Prev Med. 2017;52(4):469-475.
103.Bommersbach TJ, Stefanovics EA, Rhee TG, Tsai J, Rosenheck RA. Suicide Attempts and Homelessness: Timing of Attempts
Among Recently Homeless, Past Homeless, and Never Homeless Adults. Psychiatr Serv. 2020;71(12):1225-1231.
104.Cylus J, Glymour MM, Avendano M. Do Generous Unemployment Benefit Programs Reduce Suicide Rates? A State Fixed-Effect
Analysis Covering 1968-2008. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;180(1):45-52.
105.Kaufman JA, Livingston MD, Komro KA. Unemployment Insurance Program Accessibility and Suicide Rates in the United
States. Prev Med. 2020;141:106318.
106.Okada M, Hasegawa T, Kato R, Shiroyama T. Analysing Regional Unemployment Rates, GDP Per Capita and Financial Support
for Regional Suicide Prevention Programme on Suicide Mortality in Japan Using Governmental Statistical Data. BMJ Open.
2020;10(8):e037537.
107.Moore TH, Kapur N, Hawton K, Richards A, Metcalfe C, Gunnell D. Interventions to Reduce the Impact of Unemployment and
Economic Hardship on Mental Health in the General Population: A Systematic Review. Psychol Med. 2017;47(6):1062-1084.
108.Flavin P, Radcliff B. Public Policies and Suicide Rates in the American States. Social Indicators Research. 2009;90(2):195-209.
109.Christian C, Hensel L, Roth C. Income Shocks and Suicides: Causal Evidence From Indonesia. The Review of Economics and
Statistics. 2019;101(5):905-920.
110.DeSimone J. Suicide and the Social Security Early Retirement Age. Contemporary Economic Policy. 2018;36(3):435-450.
111.Lenhart O. The Effects of State-Level Earned Income Tax Credits on Suicides. Health Econ. 2019;28(12):1476-1482.
112.Dow WH, Godoy A, Lowenstein C, Reich M. Can Labor Market Policies Reduce Deaths of Despair? J Health Econ.
2020;74:102372.
113.Rambotti S. Is There a Relationship Between Welfare-State Policies and Suicide Rates? Evidence From the U.S. States,
2000-2015. Soc Sci Med. 2020;246:112778.
114.Gertner AK, Rotter JS, Shafer PR. Association Between State Minimum Wages and Suicide Rates in the U.S. Am J Prev Med.
2019;56(5):648-654.
115.Kaufman JA, Salas-Hernandez LK, Komro KA, Livingston MD. Effects of Increased Minimum Wages by Unemployment Rate on
Suicide in the USA. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2020;74(3):219-224.
116.Denney JT, Rogers RG, Krueger PM, Wadsworth T. Adult Suicide Mortality in the United States: Marital Status, Family Size,
Socioeconomic Status, and Differences by Sex. Soc Sci Q. 2009;90(5):1167.
117.Houle JN, Light MT. The Home Foreclosure Crisis and Rising Suicide Rates, 2005 to 2010. Am J Public Health.
2014;104(6):1073-1079.
118.Reeves A, Clair A, McKee M, Stuckler D. Reductions in the United Kingdom’s Government Housing Benefit and Symptoms of
Depression in Low-Income Households. Am J Epidemiol. 2016;184(6):421-429.
119.Denary W, Fenelon A, Schlesinger P, Purtle J, Blankenship KM, Keene DE. Does Rental Assistance Improve Mental Health?
Insights From a Longitudinal Cohort Study. Soc Sci Med. 2021;282:114100.
120.U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Housing First in Permanent Supportive Housing Brief - HUD Exchange.
2014; Available at: https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/3892/housing-first-in-permanent-supportive-housing-brief/.
121.Collins SE, Taylor EM, King VL, et al. Suicidality Among Chronically Homeless People with Alcohol Problems Attenuates
Following Exposure to Housing First. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2016;46(6):655-663.
122.Aquin JP, Roos LE, Distasio J, et al. Effect of Housing First on Suicidal Behaviour: A Randomised Controlled Trial of Homeless
Adults with Mental Disorders. Can J Psychiatry. 2017;62(7):473-481.
123.Montgomery AE, Dichter M, Byrne T, Blosnich J. Intervention to Address Homelessness and All-Cause and Suicide Mortality
Among Unstably Housed US Veterans, 2012-2016. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2020.
124.Haddon W. Advances in the Epidemiology of Injuries as a Basis for Public Policy. Public Health Reports. 1980;95(5):411-421.
88 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

125.Dahlberg LL, Krug EG. Violence-A Global Public Health Problem. In: Krug E, Dahlberg LL, Mercy JA, Zwi AB, Lozano R, eds. World
Report on Violence and Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2002:1-56.
126.Toosi M. Labor Force Projections to 2024: The Labor Force is Growing, But Slowly. In: Statistics BoL, ed. Washington, D.C.:
Bureau of Labor Statistics; 2015:1-33.
127.Han B, Crosby AE, Ortega LA, Parks SE, Compton WM, Gfroerer J. Suicidal Ideation, Suicide Attempt, and Occupations Among
Employed Adults Aged 18–64 Years in the United States. Comprehensive psychiatry. 2016;66:176-186.
128.Noonan ME. Mortality in State Prisons, 2001-2014 Bureau of Justice Statistical Tables. 2016;250150(December).
129.Knox KL, Pflanz S, Talcott GW, et al. The US Air Force Suicide Prevention Program: Implications for Public Health Policy. Am J
Public Health. 2010;100(12):2457-2463.
130.National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Workplace Task Force. Comprehensive Blueprint for Workplace Suicide Prevention.
Washington, D.C.: 2015.
131.Runyan CW, Becker A, Brandspigel S, Barber C, Trudeau A, Novins D. Lethal Means Counseling for Parents of Youth Seeking
Emergency Care for Suicidality. West J Emerg Med. 2016;17(1):8-14.
132.Miller M, Warren M, Hemenway D, Azrael D. Firearms and Suicide in US Cities. Inj Prev. 2015;21(e1):e116-119.
133.Crosby AE, Espitia-Hardeman V, Ortega L, Lozano B. Alcohol and Suicide. Alcohol: Science, Policy and Public Health. 2013:190.
134.Kaplan MS, McFarland BH, Huguet N, et al. Acute Alcohol Intoxication and Suicide: A Gender-Stratified Analysis of the National
Violent Death Reporting System. Inj Prev. 2013;19(1):38-43.
135.Beautrais AL, Gibb SJ, Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Larkin GL. Removing Bridge Barriers Stimulates Suicides: An Unfortunate
Natural Experiment. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2009;43(6):495-497.
136.Stokes ML, McCoy KP, Abram KM, Byck GR, Teplin LA. Suicidal Ideation and Behavior in Youth in the Juvenile Justice System: A
Review of the Literature. J Correct Health Care. 2015;21(3):222-242.
137.Conner A, Azrael D, Miller M. Suicide Case-Fatality Rates in the United States, 2007 to 2014: A Nationwide Population-Based
Study. Annals of internal medicine. 2019;171(12):885-895.
138.Simon OR, Swann AC, Powell KE, Potter LB, Kresnow MJ, O’Carroll PW. Characteristics of Impulsive Suicide Attempts and
Attempters. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2001;32(1 Suppl):49-59.
139.Deisenhammer EA, Ing CM, Strauss R, Kemmler G, Hinterhuber H, Weiss EM. The Duration of the Suicidal Process: How
Much Time is Left for Intervention Between Consideration and Accomplishment of a Suicide Attempt? J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(1):19-24.
140.Hawton K. Restricting Access to Methods of Suicide. Crisis. 2007;28(S1):4-9.
141.Yip PS, Caine E, Yousuf S, Chang SS, Wu KC, Chen YY. Means Restriction for Suicide Prevention. Lancet.
2012;379(9834):2393-2399.
142.Sale E, Hendricks M, Weil V, Miller C, Perkins S, McCudden S. Counseling on Access to Lethal Means (CALM): An Evaluation
of a Suicide Prevention Means Restriction Training Program for Mental Health Providers. Community Ment Health J.
2018;54(3):293-301.
143.Rowhani-Rahbar A, Simonetti JA, Rivara FP. Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Safe Firearm Storage. Epidemiol Rev.
2016;38(1):111-124.
144.Knipe DW, Chang SS, Dawson A, et al. Suicide Prevention Through Means Restriction: Impact of the 2008-2011 Pesticide
Restrictions on Suicide in Sri Lanka. PLoS One. 2017;12(3):e0172893.
145.Okolie C, Wood S, Hawton K, et al. Means Restriction for the Prevention of Suicide by Jumping. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;2(2):CD013543.
146.Gregor S, Beavan G, Culbert A, et al. Patterns of Pre-Crash Behaviour in Railway Suicides and the Effect of Corridor Fencing: A
Natural Experiment in New South Wales. Int J Inj Contr Saf Promot. 2019;26(4):423-430.
147.Sinyor M, Schaffer A, Redelmeier DA, et al. Did the Suicide Barrier Work After All? Revisiting the Bloor Viaduct Natural
Experiment and Its Impact on Suicide Rates in Toronto. BMJ Open. 2017;7(5):e015299.
148.Smart R, Morral AR, Smucker S, et al. TheScienceofGunPolicy:ACriticalSynthesisofResearchEvidenceontheEffectsofGun
Policies in the United States, Second Edition. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2020.
149.Hayes LM. Suicide Prevention in Correctional Facilities: Reflections and Next Steps. Int J Law Psychiatry. 2013;36(3-4):188-194.
150.Giesbrecht N, Huguet N, Ogden L, et al. Acute Alcohol Use Among Suicide Decedents in 14 US States: Impacts of Off-Premise
and On-Premise Alcohol Outlet Density. Addiction. 2015;110(2):300-307.
REFERENCES 89

151.Escobedo LG, Ortiz M. The Relationship Between Liquor Outlet Density and Injury and Violence in New Mexico. Accid Anal Prev.
2002;34(5):689-694.
152.Xuan Z, Naimi TS, Kaplan MS, et al. Alcohol Policies and Suicide: A Review of the Literature. Alcohol Clin Exp Res.
2016;40(10):2043-2055.
153.Cherpitel CJ, Borges GLG, Wilcox HC. Acute Alcohol Use and Suicidal Behavior: A Review of the Literature. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research. 2004;28(5 SUPPL.):18S-28S.
154.Ilgen MA, Bohnert ASB, Ganoczy D, Bair MJ, McCarthy JF, Blow FC. Opioid Dose and Risk of Suicide. Pain.
2016;157(5):1079-1084.
155.Perron S, Burrows S, Fournier M, Perron PA, Ouellet F. Installation of a Bridge Barrier as a Suicide Prevention strategy in
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Am J Public Health. 2013;103(7):1235-1239.
156.Grossman DC, Mueller BA, Riedy C, et al. Gun Storage Practices and Risk of Youth Suicide and Unintentional Firearm Injuries.
JAMA. 2005;293(6):707-714.
157.Shelef L, Laur L, Raviv G, Fruchter E. In the Israeli Defense Force: A Review of an Important Military Medical Procedure. Disaster
Mil Med 2015;1:16.
158.Lubin G, Werbeloff N, Halperin D, Shmushkevitch M, Weiser M, Knobler HY. Decrease in Suicide Rates After a Change of Policy
Reducing Access to Firearms in Adolescents: A Naturalistic Epidemiological Study. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2010;40(5):421-424.
159.Slovak K, Pope N, Giger J, Kheibari A. An Evaluation of the Counseling on Access to Lethal Means (CALM) Training With an Area
Agency on Aging. J Gerontol Soc Work 2019;62(1):48-66.
160.Azad HA, Monuteaux MC, Rees CA, et al. Child Access Prevention Firearm Laws and Firearm Fatalities Among Children Aged 0
to 14 Years, 1991-2016. JAMA Pediatr 2020;174(5):463-469.
161.Miller M, Zhang W, Rowhani-Rahbar A, Azrael D. Child Access Prevention Laws and Firearm Storage: Results from a National
Survey. Am J Prev Med 2022;62(3):333-340.
162.U.S. Air Force Resilience. Suicide Prevention. See the Signs, Reduce Risk Factors. n.d.; Available at: https://www.resilience.
af.mil/Suicide-Prevention-Program/.
163.Knox KL, Litts DA, Talcott GW, Feig JC, Caine ED. Risk of Suicide and Related Adverse Outcomes After Exposure to a Suicide
Prevention Programme in the US Air Force: Cohort Study. BMJ 2003;327(7428):1376.
164.Mishara BL, Martin N. Effects of a Comprehensive Police Suicide Prevention Program. Crisis 2012;33(3):162-168.
165.Mishara BL, Fortin LF. Long-Term Effects of a Comprehensive Police Suicide Prevention Program: 22-Year Follow-Up. Crisis
2021.
166.Groschwitz R, Munz L, Straub J, Bohnacker I, Plener PL. Strong Schools Against Suicidality and Self-Injury: Evaluation of a
Workshop for School Staff. Sch Psychol Q 2017;32(2):188-198.
167.Suicide Prevention Resource Center. Creating Suicide Safety in Schools. 2013; Available at: https://www.sprc.org/
resources-programs/creating-suicide-safety-schools.
168.Hayes LM. Prison Suicide: An Overview and a Guide to Prevention. Prison J 2016;75(4):431-456.
169.Barker E, Kolves K, De Leo D. Management of Suicidal and Self-Harming Behaviors in Prisons: Systematic Literature Review of
Evidence-Based Activities. Arch Suicide Res 2014;18(3):227-240.
170.Poorolajal J, Haghtalab T, Farhadi M, Darvishi N. Substance Use Disorder and Risk of Suicidal Ideation, Suicide Attempt and
Suicide Death: A Meta-Analysis. J Public Health (Oxf) 2016;38(3):e282-e291.
171.Rush BR, Gliksman L, Brook R. Alcohol Availability, Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol-Related Damage. I. The Distribution of
Consumption Model. J Stud Alcohol 1986;47(1):1-10.
172.Gruenewald PJ, Remer L. Changes in Outlet Densities Affect Violence Rates. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2006;30(7):1184-1193.
173.Lipton R, Gruenewald P. The Spatial Dynamics of Violence and Alcohol Outlets. J Stud Alcohol 2002;63(2):187-195.
174.Lippy C, DeGue S. Exploring Alcohol Policy Approaches to Prevent Sexual Violence Perpetration. Trauma Violence Abuse
2016;17(1):26-42.
175.Kolves K, Chitty KM, Wardhani R, Varnik A, de Leo D, Witt K. Impact of Alcohol Policies on Suicidal Behavior: A Systematic
Literature Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020;17(19).
176.Johnson FW, Gruenewald PJ, Remer LG. Suicide and Alcohol: Do Outlets Play a Role? Alcohol Clin Exp Res
2009;33(12):2124-2133.
90 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

177.Borgschulte M, Corredor-Waldron A, Marshall G. A Path Out: Prescription Drug Abuse, Treatment, and Suicide. J Econ Behav
Org 2018;149:169-184.
178.National Alliance on Mental Health New Hampshire. NH Firearm Safety Coalition – The Connect Program. 2021; Available at:
https://theconnectprogram.org/resources/nh-firearm-safety-coalition/.
179.Vriniotis M, Barber C, Frank E, Demicco R, New Hampshire Firearm Safety C. A Suicide Prevention Campaign for Firearm
Dealers in New Hampshire. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2015;45(2):157-163.
180.Raifman J, Moscoe E, Austin SB, McConnell M. Difference-in-Differences Analysis of the Association Between State Same-Sex
Marriage Policies and Adolescent Suicide Attempts. JAMA Pediatr 2017;171(4):350-356.
181.McDowell A, Raifman J, Progovac AM, Rose S. Association of Nondiscrimination Policies With Mental Health Among Gender
Minority Individuals. JAMA Psychiatry 2020;77(9):952-958.
182.Davis B, Royne Stafford MB, Pullig C. How Gay–Straight Alliance Groups Mitigate the Relationship Between Gay-Bias
Victimization and Adolescent Suicide Attempts. J Am Acad Child Adoles Psychiatry 2014;53(12):1271-1278.e1271.
183.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About the CDC-Kaiser ACE Study. Atlanta, GA; 2021; Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/violenceprevention/aces/about.html.
184.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. To Live to See the Great Day that Dawns: Preventing Suicide by American Indian
and Alaska Native Youth and Young Adults. Rockville, MD. 2010;DHHS Publication SMA (10)-4480, CMHS-NSPL-0196.
185.Breux P, Boccio DE. Improving Schools’ Readiness for Involvement in Suicide Prevention: An Evaluation of the Creating Suicide
Safety in Schools (CSSS) Workshop. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2019;16(12).
186.Owens D, Horrocks J, House A. Fatal and Non-Fatal Repetition of Self-Harm. Systematic Review. Br J Psychiatry
2002;181(3):193-199.
187.Olfson M, Gerhard T, Huang C, Crystal S, Stroup TS. Premature Mortality Among Adults With Schizophrenia in the United
States. JAMA Psychiatry 2015;72(12):1172-1181.
188.Harris EC, Barraclough B. Excess Mortality of Mental Disorder. Br J Psychiatry 1998;173:11-53.
189.Cunningham PJ. Beyond Parity: Primary Care Physicians’ Perspectives on Access to Mental Health Care. HealthAff(Millwood)
2009;28(3):w490-501.
190.Maura J, Weisman de Mamani A. Mental Health Disparities, Treatment Engagement, and Attrition Among Racial/Ethnic
Minorities with Severe Mental Illness: A Review. J Clin Psychol Med Settings 2017;24(3-4):187-210.
191.Cook BL, Trinh NH, Li Z, Hou SS, Progovac AM. Trends in Racial-Ethnic Disparities in Access to Mental Health Care, 2004-2012.
Psychiatr Serv 2017;68(1):9-16.
192.Gilmour L, Maxwell M, Duncan E. Policy Addressing Suicidality in Children and Young People: An International Scoping Review.
BMJ Open 2019;9(10):e030699.
193.Littlewood DL, Quinlivan L, Graney J, et al. Learning from Clinicians’ Views of Good Quality Practice in Mental Healthcare
Services in the Context of Suicide Prevention: A Qualitative Study. BMC Psychiatry 2019;19(1):346.
194.Coffey CE. Building a System of Perfect Depression Care in Behavioral Health. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2007;33(4):193-199.
195.Steelesmith DL, Fontanella CA, Campo JV, Bridge JA, Warren KL, Root ED. Contextual Factors Associated with County-Level
Suicide Rates in the United States, 1999 to 2016. JAMA Netw Open 2019;2(9):e1910936.
196.The Paul Wellstone and Pete Dominici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MPHEA). In. Vol HR 14242008.
197.Hester RD. Lack of Access to Mental Health Services Contributing to the High Suicide Rates Among Veterans. Int J Ment Health
Syst 2017;11(1):47.
198.National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Clinical Workforce Task Force. Suicide Prevention and the Clinical
Workforce: Guidelines for Training. Washington, D.C.; 2014; Available at: https://theactionalliance.org/resource/
suicide-prevention-and-clinical-workforce-guidelines-training.
199.Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Behavioral Health Statistics
and Quality. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 2016; Available at: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/
release/2016-national-survey-drug-use-and-health-nsduh-releases.
200.Harris KM, Carpenter C, Bao Y. The Effects of State Parity Laws on the Use of Mental Health Care. Med Care
2006;44(6):499-505.
201.Sipe TA, Finnie RK, Knopf JA, et al. Effects of Mental Health Benefits Legislation: A Community Guide Systematic Review. Am J
Prev Med 2015;48(6):755-766.
REFERENCES 91

202. Li X, Ma J. Does Mental Health Parity Encourage Mental Health Utilization among Children and Adolescents? Evidence from
the 2008 Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA). J Behav Health Serv Res 2020;47(1):38-53.
203. Klick J, Markowitz S. Are Mental Health Insurance Mandates Effective? Evidence from Suicides. Health Econ 2006;15(1):83-97.
204. Lang M. The Impact of Mental Health Insurance Laws on State Suicide Rates. Health Econ 2013;22(1):73-88.
205. Health Resources & Services Administration. National Health Service Corps.
206. Han X, Ku L. Enhancing Staffing in Rural Community Health Centers can Help Improve Behavioral Health Care. HealthAff
(Millwood) 2019;38(12):2061-2068.
207. Hung P, Busch SH, Shih YW, McGregor AJ, Wang S. Changes in Community Mental Health Services Availability and Suicide
Mortality in the US: A Retrospective Study. BMC Psychiatry 2020;20(1):188.
208. Hailey D, Roine R, Ohinmaa A. The Effectiveness of Telemental Health Applications: A Review. Can J Psychiatry
2008;53(11):769-778.
209. Mohr DC, Vella L, Hart S, Heckman T, Simon G. The Effect of Telephone-Administered Psychotherapy on Symptoms of
Depression and Attrition: A Meta-Analysis. Clin Psychol (New York) 2008;15(3):243-253.
210. McGinn MM, Roussev MS, Shearer EM, McCann RA, Rojas SM, Felker BL. Recommendations for Clinical Video Telehealth with
Patients at High Risk for Suicide. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2019;42(4):587-595.
211. Arean PA, Hallgren KA, Jordan JT, et al. The Use and Effectiveness of Mobile Apps for Depression: Results from a Fully Remote
Clinical Trial. J Med Internet Res 2016;18(12):e330.
212. Richards D, Duffy D, Burke J, Anderson M, Connell S, Timulak L. Supported Internet-Delivered Cognitive Behavior Treatment
for Adults with Severe Depressive Symptoms: A Secondary Analysis. JMIR Ment Health 2018;5(4):e10204.
213. Coffey CE. Pursuing Perfect Depression Care. Psychiatr Serv 2006;57(10):1524-1526.
214. Coffey CE, Coffey MJ, Ahmedani BK. An Update on Perfect Depression Care. Psychiatr Serv 2013;64(4):396.
215. Coffey MJ, Coffey CE, Ahmedani BK. Suicide in a Health Maintenance Organization Population. JAMA Psychiatry
2015;72(3):294-296.
216. Layman DM, Kammer J, Leckman-Westin E, et al. The Relationship Between Suicidal Behaviors and Zero Suicide Organizational
Best Practices in Outpatient Mental Health Clinics. Psychiatric Services 2021;72(10):1118-1125.
217. Stapelberg NJC, Sveticic J, Hughes I, et al. Efficacy of the Zero Suicide Framework in Reducing Recurrent Suicide Attempts:
Cross-Sectional and Time-to-Recurrent-Event Analyses. Br J Psychiatry 2020;219(2):427-436.
218. Durkheim E. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.(Original work published 1897); 1897/1951.
219. Cornwell EY, Waite LJ. Social Disconnectedness, Perceived Isolation, and Health Among Older Adults. J Health Soc Behav
2009;50(1):31-48.
220. Marraccini ME, Brier ZMF. School Connectedness and Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors: A Systematic Meta-Analysis. Sch
Psychol Q 2017;32(1):5-21.
221. Siedlecki KL, Salthouse TA, Oishi S, Jeswani S. The Relationship Between Social Support and Subjective Well-Being Across Age.
Soc Indic Res 2014;117(2):561-576.
222. Portes A, Vickstrom E. Diversity, Social Capital and Cohesion. In: Rae A, Bribosia E, Rorive I, Sredanovic D, eds. Governing
Diversity: Migrant Integration and Multiculturalism in North America and Europe. Institut D’Estudes Europeennes; 2011.
223. Muennig P, Cohen AK, Palmer A, Zhu W. The Relationship Between Five Different Measures of Structural Social Capital,
Medical Examination Outcomes, and Mortality. Soc Sci Med 2013;85:18-26.
224. Beyer KM, Layde PM, Hamberger LK, Laud PW. Does Neighborhood Environment Differentiate Intimate Partner Femicides
from other Femicides? Violence Against Women 2015;21(1):49-64.
225. Whitley R, McKenzie K. Social Capital and Psychiatry: A Review of the Literature. Harv Rev Psychiatry 2005;13(2):71-84.
226. De Silva MJ, McKenzie K, Harpham T, Huttly SR. Social Capital and Mental Illness: A Systematic Review. J Epidemiol Community
Health 2005;59(8):619-627.
227. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Strategic Direction for the Prevention of Suicidal Behavior: Promoting Individual,
Family, and Community Connectedness to Prevent Suicidal Behavior. Atlanta, GA; 2009; Available at: https://stacks.cdc.gov/
view/cdc/11796/cdc_11796_DS1.pdf.
228. Wyman PA, Pisani AR, Brown CH, et al. Effect of the Wingman-Connect Upstream Suicide Prevention Program for Air Force
Personnel in Training: A Cluster Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3(10):e2022532.
92 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

229. Mueller AS, Abrutyn S, Stockton C. Can Social Ties Be Harmful? Examining the Spread of Suicide in Early Adulthood. Sociol
Perspect 2014;58(2):204-222.
230. Wyman PA. Developmental Approach to Prevent Adolescent Suicides: Research Pathways to Effective Upstream Preventive
Interventions. Am J Prev Med 2014;47(3 Suppl 2):S251-256.
231. Schlichthorst M, Ozols I, Reifels L, Morgan A. Lived Experience Peer Support Programs for Suicide Prevention: A Systematic
Scoping Review. Int J Ment Health Syst 2020;14(1):65.
232. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Principles of Community Engagement. CDC/ATSDR Committee on Community
Engagement. Atlanta, GA; 2011; Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/communityengagement/pdf/PCE_Report_508_FINAL.
pdf.
233. Branas CC, Cheney RA, MacDonald JM, Tam VW, Jackson TD, Ten Have TR. A Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Health,
Safety, and Greening Vacant Urban Space. Am J Epidemiol 2011;174(11):1296-1306.
234. Branas CC, Kondo MC, Murphy SM, South EC, Polsky D, MacDonald JM. Urban Blight Remediation as a Cost-Beneficial Solution
to Firearm Violence. Am J Public Health 2016;106(12):2158-2164.
235. South EC, Hohl BC, Kondo MC, MacDonald JM, Branas CC. Effect of Greening Vacant Land on Mental Health of Community-
Dwelling Adults: A Cluster Randomized Trial. JAMA Netw Open 2018;1(3):e180298.
236. Pfeiffer PN, King C, Ilgen M, et al. Development and Pilot Study of a Suicide Prevention Intervention Delivered by Peer Support
Specialists. Psychol Serv 2019;16(3):360-371.
237. Milligan C, Neary D, Payne S, Hanratty B, Irwin P, Dowrick C. Older Men and Social Activity: A Scoping Review of Men’s Sheds
and Other Gendered Interventions. Aging & Society 2016;36(5):895-923.
238. Ang SH, Cavanagh J, Southcombe A, Bartram T, Marjoribanks T, McNeil N. Human Resource Management, Social
Connectedness and Health and Well-Being of Older and Retired Men: The Role of Men’s Sheds. Int J Hum Resour Manag
2017;28(14):1986-2016.
239. Colder Carras M, Bergendahl M, Labrique AB. Community Case Study: Stack Up’s Overwatch Program, an Online Suicide
Prevention and Peer Support Program for Video Gamers. Front Psychol 2021;12:575224.
240. Objective Zero Foundation. Our Mission. n.d.; Available at: https://www.objectivezero.org/mission.
241. Wong CA, Ming D, Maslow G, Gifford EJ. Mitigating the Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic Response on At-Risk Children.
Pediatrics 2020;146(1).
242. King CA, Gipson PY, Arango A, et al. LET’s CONNECT Community Mentorship Program for Youths with Peer Social Problems:
Preliminary Findings from a Randomized Effectiveness Trial. J Community Psychol 2018;46(7):885-902.
243. King CA, Gipson PY, Arango A, et al. LET’s CONNECT Community Mentorship Program for Adolescents with Peer Social
Problems: A Randomized Intervention Trial. Am J Community Psychol 2021;68(3-4):310-322.
244. Kellam SG, Mackenzie ACL, Brown CH, et al. The Good Behavior Game and the Future of Prevention and Treatment. Addict Sci
Clin Pract 2011;July:73-84.
245. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc; 1986.
246. Pollock LR, Williams JM. Problem-Solving in Suicide Attempters. Psychol Med 2004;34(1):163-167.
247. Bjorkenstam C, Kosidou K, Bjorkenstam E. Childhood Adversity and Risk of Suicide: Cohort Study of 548 721 Adolescents and
Young Adults in Sweden. BMJ 2017;357:j1334.
248. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Essentials for Childhood Creating Safe, Stable, Nurturing Relationships and
Environments for All Children. Atlanta, GA; n.d.; Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/essentials-for-
childhood-framework508.pdf
249. Payton J, Weissber RP, Durlak JA, et al. The Positive Impact of Social and Emotional Learning for Kindergarten to Eigth-Grade
Students:FindingsfromThreeScientificReviews. Chicago, IL: Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning; 2008.
250. Herman KC, Borden LA, Reinke WM, Webster-Stratton C. The Impact of the Incredible Years Parent, Child, and Teacher
Training Programs on Children’s Co-Occurring Internalizing Symptoms. Sch Psychol Q 2011;26(3):189-201.
251. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Prevention of Mental Disorders. Reducing Risks for Mental Disorders: Frontiers for
Preventive Intervention Research. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 1994.
252. Knox MS, Burkhart K, Hunter KE. ACT Against Violence Parents Raising Safe Kids Program: Effects on Maltreatment-Related
Parenting Behaviors and Beliefs. J Fam Issues 2010.
REFERENCES 93

253. Taylor RD, Oberle E, Durlak JA, Weissberg RP. Promoting Positive Youth Development Through School-Based Social and
Emotional Learning Interventions: A Meta-Analysis of Follow-Up Effects. Child Dev 2017;88(4):1156-1171.
254. Weissberg RP. Promoting the Social and Emotional Learning of Millions of School Children. Perspect Psychol Sci
2019;14(1):65-69.
255. Jones DE, Greenberg M, Crowley M. Early Social-Emotional Functioning and Public Health: The Relationship Between
Kindergarten Social Competence and Future Wellness. Am J Public Health 2015;105(11):2283-2290.
256. Durlak JA. Handbook of Social and Emotional Learning: Research and Practice. Guilford Publications; 2015.
257. Wasserman D, Hoven CW, Wasserman C, et al. School-Based Suicide Prevention Programmes: The SEYLE Cluster-Randomised,
Controlled Trial. Lancet 2015;385(9977):1536-1544.
258. Kahn JP, Cohen RF, Tubiana A, et al. Influence of Coping Strategies on the Efficacy of YAM (Youth Aware of Mental Health): A
Universal School-Based Suicide Preventive Program. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2020;29(12):1671-1681.
259. Wilcox HC, Kellam SG, Brown CH, et al. The Impact of Two Universal Randomized First- and Second-Grade Classroom
Interventions on Young Adult Suicide Ideation and Attempts. Drug Alcohol Depend 2008;95 Suppl 1:S60-73.
260. Kellam SG, Brown CH, Poduska JM, et al. Effects of a Universal Classroom Behavior Management Program in First and Second
Grades on Young Adult Behavioral, Psychiatric, and Social Outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend 2008;95 Suppl 1:S5-S28.
261. Newcomer AR, Roth KB, Kellam SG, et al. Higher Childhood Peer Reports of Social Preference Mediates the Impact of the
Good Behavior Game on Suicide Attempt. Prev Sci 2016;17(2):145-156.
262. Roberts CM, Kane RT, Rooney RM, et al. Efficacy of the Aussie Optimism Program: Promoting Pro-Social Behavior and
Preventing Suicidality in Primary School Students. A Randomised-Controlled Trial. Front Psychol 2017;8:1392.
263. Schilling EA, Aseltine RH, Jr., James A. The SOS Suicide Prevention Program: Further Evidence of Efficacy and Effectiveness. Prev
Sci 2016;17(2):157-166.
264. Turecki G, Brent DA. Suicide and Suicidal Behaviour. Lancet 2016;387(10024):1227-1239.
265. Conner KR, Wyman P, Goldston DB, et al. Two Studies of Connectedness to Parents and Suicidal Thoughts and Behavior in
Children and Adolescents. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol 2016;45(2):129-140.
266. Reid MJ, Webster-Stratton C, Hammond M. Follow-Up of Children who Received the Incredible Years Intervention for
Oppositional-Defiant Disorder: Maintenance and Prediction of 2-year Outcome. Behavior Therapy 2003;34(4):471-491.
267. Webster-Stratton C, Hammond M. Treating Children with Early-Onset Conduct Problems: A Comparison of Child and Parent
Training Interventions. J Consult Clin Psychol 1997;65(1):93-109.
268. Webster-Stratton C, Reid MJ, Hammond M. Preventing Conduct Problems, Promoting Social Competence: A Parent and
Teacher Training Partnership in Head Start. J Clin Child Psychol 2001;30(3):283-302.
269. Spoth RL, Guyll M, Day SX. Universal Family-Focused Interventions in Alcohol-Use Disorder Prevention: Cost-Effectiveness and
Cost-Benefit Analyses of Two Interventions. J Stud Alcohol 2002;63(2):219-228.
270. Brent D. Prevention Programs to Augment Family and Child Resilience can have Lasting Effects on Suicidal Risk. Suicide Life
Threat Behav 2016;46 Suppl 1:S39-47.
271. Connell AM, McKillop HN, Dishion TJ. Long-Term Effects of the Family Check-Up in Early Adolescence on Risk of Suicide in Early
Adulthood. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2016;46 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S15-22.
272. Sandler I, Tein JY, Wolchik S, Ayers TS. The Effects of the Family Bereavement Program to Reduce Suicide Ideation and/
or Attempts of Parentally Bereaved Children Six and Fifteen Years Later. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2016;46 Suppl 1(Suppl
1):S32-38.
273. Vidot DC, Huang S, Poma S, Estrada Y, Lee TK, Prado G. Familias Unidas’ Crossover Effects on Suicidal Behaviors Among
Hispanic Adolescents: Results from an Effectiveness Trial. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2016;46 Suppl 1:S8-14.
274. Gewirtz AH, DeGarmo DS, Zamir O. Effects of a Military Parenting Program on Parental Distress and Suicidal Ideation: After
Deployment Adaptive Parenting Tools. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2016;46 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S23-31.
275. Akeman E, Kirlic N, Clausen AN, et al. A Pragmatic Clinical Trial Examining the Impact of a Resilience Program on College
Student Mental Health. Depress Anxiety 2020;37(3):202-213.
276. Rowe HL, Trickett EJ. Student Diversity Representation and Reporting in Universal School-Based Social and Emotional Learning
Programs: Implications for Generalizability. Educ Psychol Rev 2017;30(2):559-583.
277. Shatkin JP, Diamond U, Zhao Y, DiMeglio J, Chodaczek M, Bruzzese JM. Effects of a Risk and Resilience Course on Stress,
Coping Skills, and Cognitive Strategies in College Students. Teach Psychol 2016;43(3):204-210.
94 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

278. Antony J, Brar R, Khan PA, et al. Interventions for the Prevention and Management of Occupational Stress Injury in First
Responders: A Rapid Overview of Reviews. Syst Rev 2020;9(1):121.
279. 279. Robertson IT, Cooper CL, Sarkar M, Curran T. Resilience Training in the Workplace from 2003 to 2014: A Systematic
Review. J Occup Organ Psychol 2015;88(3):533-562.
280. Luca DL, Garlow N, Staatz C, Margiotta C, Zivin K. Societal Costs of Untreated Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders in the
United States. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, 2019.
281. Ngai FW, Chan SW, Ip WY. The Effects of a Childbirth Psychoeducation Program on Learned Resourcefulness, Maternal Role
Competence and Perinatal Depression: A Quasi-Experiment. Int J Nurs Stud. 2009;46(10):1298-1306.
282. Robertson IT, Cooper CL, Sarkar M, et al. Resilience Training in the Workplace from 2003 to 2014: A Systematic Review. J Occup
Organ Psychol. 2015;88(3):533-62.
283. Padmanathan P, Hall K, Moran P, et al. Prevention of suicide and reduction of self-harm among people with substance use
disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Compr Psychiatry. 2020;96:152135.
284. Lineberry TW, O’Connor SS. Suicide in the US Army. Mayo Clin Proc 2012;87(9):871-878.
285. Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, et al. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance - United States, 2015. MMWR Surveill Summ.
2016;65(6):1-174.
286. Curtin SC, Warner M, Hedegaard H. Increase in Suicide in the United States, 1999-2014. NCHS Data Brief. 2016;241:1-8.
287. Haroz EE, Decker E, Lee C, Bolton P, Spiegel P, Ventevogel P. Evidence for Suicide Prevention Strategies with Populations in
Displacement: A Systematic Review. Intervention (Amstelveen). 2020;18(1):37-44.
288. Congressional Black Caucus Emergency Task Force on Black Youth Suicide and Mental Health. Ring the: The of Black in
America. Washington, D.C. Available at: https://theactionalliance.org/resource/ring-alarm-crisis-black-youth-suicide-america.
289. Bruce ML, Sirey JA. Integrated care for depression in older primary care patients. Can J Psychiatry. 2018;63(7):439-446.
290. Miller AB, Esposito-Smythers C, Weismoore JT, Renshaw KD. The relation between child maltreatment and adolescent suicidal
behavior: A systematic review and critical examination of the literature. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2013;16(2):146-172.
291. Stein DJ, Chiu WT, Hwang I, et al. Cross-national analysis of the associations between traumatic events and suicidal behavior:
findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLoS One. 2010;5(5):e10574.
292. National Institute of Mental Health. Suicide Prevention. Available at: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
suicide-prevention.
293. Fuller‐Thomson E, Baird SL, Dhrodia R, Brennenstuhl S. The Association Between Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and
Suicide Attempts in a Population‐Based Study. Child Care Health Dev. 2016;42(5):725-734.
294. Russell ST, Joyner K. Adolescent Sexual Orientation and Suicide Risk: Evidence from a National Study. Am J Public Health.
2001;91(8):1276-1281.
295. Wang PS, Demler O, Kessler RC. Adequacy of Treatment for Serious Mental Illness in the United States. Am J Public Health.
2002;92(1):92-98.
296. Wilcox HC, Wyman PA. Suicide prevention strategies for improving population health. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am.
2016;25(2):219-233.
297. Mann JJ, Michel CA, Auerbach RP. Improving Suicide Prevention Through Evidence-Based Strategies: A Systematic Review. Am J
Psychiatry. 2021;178(7):611-624.
298. Jobes DA. The Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS): An evolving evidence-based clinical approach
to suicidal risk. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2012;42(6):640-653.
299. Wasserman D, Iosue M, Wuestefeld A, Carli V. Adaptation of evidence-based suicide prevention strategies during and after the
COVID-19 pandemic. World Psychiatry. 2020;19(3):294-306.
300. Isaac M, Elias B, Katz LY, et al. Gatekeeper training as a preventative intervention for suicide: A systematic review. Can J
Psychiatry. 2009;54(4):260-268.
301. Hoffberg AS, Stearns-Yoder KA, Brenner LA. The effectiveness of crisis line services: A systematic review. Front Public Health.
2020;7:399.
302. Gould MS, Munfakh JLH, Kleinman M, Lake AM. National suicide prevention lifeline: Enhancing mental health care for suicidal
individuals and other people in crisis. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2012;42(1):22-35.
REFERENCES 95

303. Inagaki M, Kawashima Y, Kawanishi C, et al. Interventions to prevent repeat suicidal behavior in patients admitted to an
emergency department for a suicide attempt: A meta-analysis. JAffectDisord. 2015;175:66-78.
304. Luxton DD, June JD, Comtois KA. Can postdischarge follow-up contacts prevent suicide and suicidal behavior? A review of the
evidence. Crisis. 2013;34(1):32-41.
305. Gilbody S, Bower P, Fletcher J, Richards D, Sutton AJ. Collaborative care for depression: A cumulative meta-analysis and review
of longer-term outcomes. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(21):2314-2321.
306. Archer J, Bower P, Gilbody S, et al. Collaborative care for depression and anxiety problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;10:CD006525.
307. Bruce ML, Ten Have TR, Reynolds CF, III, et al. Reducing suicidal ideation and depressive symptoms in depressed older
primary care patients: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291(9):1081-1091.
308. Ewell Foster CJ, Burnside AN, Smith PK, Kramer AC, Wills A, King CA. Identification, response, and referral of suicidal youth
following applied suicide intervention skills training. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2017;47(3):297-308.
309. Gould MS, Cross W, Pisani AR, Munfakh JL, Kleinman M. Impact of applied suicide intervention skills training on the National
Suicide Prevention Lifeline. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2013;43(6):676-691.
310. Walrath C, Garraza LG, Reid H, Goldston DB, McKeon R. Impact of the Garrett Lee Smith youth suicide prevention program on
suicide mortality. Am J Public Health. 2015;105(5):986-993.
311. Godoy Garraza L, Kuiper N, Goldston D, McKeon R, Walrath C. Long-term impact of the Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide
Prevention Program on youth suicide mortality, 2006-2015. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2019;60(10):1142-1147.
312. Litteken C, Sale E. Long-term effectiveness of the question, persuade, refer (QPR) suicide prevention gatekeeper training
program: Lessons from Missouri. Community Ment Health J. 2018;54(3):282-292.
313. Hart LM, Cropper P, Morgan AJ, Kelly CM, Jorm AF. Teen Mental Health First Aid as a school-based intervention for improving
peer support of adolescents at risk of suicide: Outcomes from a cluster randomised crossover trial. Aust N Z J Psychiatry.
2020;54(4):382-392.
314. Morgan AJ, Ross A, Reavley NJ. Systematic review and meta-analysis of Mental Health First Aid training: Effects on knowledge,
stigma, and helping behaviour. PLoS One. 2018;13(5):e0197102.
315. Teo AR, Andrea SB, Sakakibara R, Motohara S, Matthieu MM, Fetters MD. Brief gatekeeper training for suicide prevention in an
ethnic minority population: A controlled intervention. BMC Psychiatry. 2016;16(1):211.
316. Kuhlman STW, Walch SE, Bauer KN, Glenn AD. Intention to enact and enactment of gatekeeper behaviors for suicide
prevention: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Prev Sci. 2017;18(6):704-715.
317. Wyman PA, Brown CH, Inman J, et al. Randomized trial of a gatekeeper program for suicide prevention: 1-year impact on
secondary school staff. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2008;76(1):104-115.
318. Holmes G, Clacy A, Hermens DF, Lagopoulos J. The long-term efficacy of suicide prevention gatekeeper training: A systematic
review. Arch Suicide Res. 2019;25(2):177-207.
319. Gould MS, Kalafat J, Harrismunfakh JL, Kleinman M. An evaluation of crisis hotline outcomes. Part 2: Suicidal callers. Suicide
Life Threat Behav. 2007;37(3):338-352.
320. Hannemann CM, Katz IR, McCarthy ME, Hughes GJ, McKeon R, McCarthy JF. Suicide mortality and related behavior following
calls to the Veterans Crisis Line by Veterans Health Administration patients. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2021;51(3):596-605.
321. Bush NE, Smolenski DJ, Denneson LM, Williams HB, Thomas EK, Dobscha SK. A virtual hope box: Randomized controlled trial
of a smartphone app for emotional regulation and coping with distress. Psychiatr Serv. 2017;68(4):330-336.
322. Dimeff LA, Jobes DA, Koerner K, et al. Using a Tablet-Based App to Deliver Evidence-Based Practices for Suicidal Patients in the
Emergency Department: Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial. JMIR Ment Health. 2021;8(3):e23022.
323. Torous J, Larsen ME, Depp C, et al. Smartphones, sensors, and machine learning to advance real-time prediction and
interventions for suicide prevention: A review of current progress and next steps. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2018;20(7):1-6.
324. Bryan CJ, Mintz J, Clemans TA, et al. Effect of crisis response planning vs. contracts for safety on suicide risk in U.S. Army
Soldiers: A randomized clinical trial. JAffectDisord. 2017;212:64-72.
325. Stanley B, Brown GK, Brenner LA, et al. Comparison of the safety planning intervention with follow-up vs usual care of suicidal
patients treated in the emergency department. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(9):894-900.
326. Motto JA, Bostrom AG. A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide prevention. Psychiatr Serv. 2001;52(6):828-833.
96 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

327. Hassanian-Moghaddam H, Sarjami S, Kolahi AA, Carter GL. Postcards in Persia: Randomised controlled trial to reduce suicidal
behaviours 12 months after hospital-treated self-poisoning. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;198(4):309-316.
328. Wang YC, Hsieh LY, Wang MY, Chou CH, Huang MW, Ko HC. Coping card usage can further reduce suicide reattempt in suicide
attempter case management within 3-month intervention. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2016;46(1):106-120.
329. Messiah A, Notredame CE, Demarty AL, Duhem S, Vaiva G. Combining green cards, telephone calls and postcards into an
intervention algorithm to reduce suicide reattempt (AlgoS): P-hoc analyses of an inconclusive randomized controlled trial.
PLoS One. 2019;14(2):e0210778.
330. Comtois KA, Kerbrat AH, DeCou CR, et al. Effect of augmenting standard care for military personnel with brief caring text
messages for suicide prevention: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2019;76(5):474-483.
331. Exbrayat S, Coudrot C, Gourdon X, et al. Effect of telephone follow-up on repeated suicide attempt in patients discharged
from an emergency psychiatry department: A controlled study. BMC Psychiatry. 2017;17(1):96.
332. Miller IW, Camargo CA, Arias SA, et al. Suicide prevention in an emergency department population: The ED-SAFE study. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2017;74(6):563-570.
333. Boudreaux ED, Camargo CA, Arias SA, et al. Improving suicide risk screening and detection in the emergency department. Am
J Prev Med. 2016;50(4):445-453.
334. Gysin-Maillart A, Schwab S, Soravia L, Megert M, Michel K. A novel brief therapy for patients who attempt suicide: A
24-months follow-up randomized controlled study of the Attempted Suicide Short Intervention Program (ASSIP). PLoS Med.
2016;13(30):e1001968.
335. Michel K, Valach L, Gysin-Maillart A. A novel therapy for people who attempt suicide and why we need new models of suicide.
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(3):243-258.
336. Hunkeler EM, Katon W, Tang L, et al. Long term outcomes from the IMPACT randomised trial for depressed elderly patients in
primary care. BMJ. 2006;332(7536):259-263.
337. Unutzer J, Tang L, Oishi S, et al. Reducing suicidal ideation in depressed older primary care patients. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2006;54(10):1550-1556.
338. Iyengar U, Snowden N, Asarnow JR, Moran P, Tranah T, Ougrin D. A further look at therapeutic interventions for suicide
attempts and self-harm in adolescents: An updated systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Front Psychiatry.
2018;9:583.
339. Linehan MM, Comtois KA, Murray AM, et al. Two-year randomized controlled trial and follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy
vs therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline personality disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63(7):757-766.
340. McCauley E, Berk MS, Asarnow JR, et al. Efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy for adolescents at high risk for suicide: A
randomized controlled trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(8):777-785.
341. Asarnow JR, Hughes JL, Babeva KN, Sugar CA. Cognitive-behavioral family treatment for suicide attempt prevention: A
randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2017;56(6):506-514.
342. Gotzsche PC, Gotzsche PK. Cognitive behavioural therapy halves the risk of repeated suicide attempts: Systematic review. J R
Soc Med. 2017;110(10):404-410.
343. Brown GK, Ten Have T, Henriques GR, Xie SX, Hollander JE, Beck AT. Cognitive therapy for the prevention of suicide attempts:
A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294(5):563-570.
344. Rudd MD, Bryan CJ, Wertenberger EG, et al. Brief cognitive-behavioral therapy effects on post-treatment suicide attempts in a
military sample: Results of a randomized clinical trial with 2-year follow-up. Am J Psychiatry. 2015;172(5):441-449.
345. Hopko DR, Funderburk JS, Shorey RC, et al. Behavioral activation and problem-solving therapy for depressed breast cancer
patients: Preliminary support for decreased suicidal ideation. Behav Modif. 2013;37(6):747-767.
346. Choi NG, Marti CN, Conwell Y. Effect of problem-solving therapy on depressed low-income homebound older adults’ death/
suicidal ideation and hopelessness. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2016;46(3):323-336.
347. Comtois KA, Jobes DA, O’Connor SS, et al. Collaborative assessment and management of suicidality (CAMS): Feasibility trial for
next-day appointment services. Depress Anxiety. 2011;28(11):963-972.
348. Pistorello J, Jobes DA, Gallop R, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the collaborative assessment and management of
suicidality (CAMS) versus treatment as usual (TAU) for suicidal college students. Arch Suicide Res. 2021;25(4):765-789.
349. Andreasson K, Krogh J, Wenneberg C, et al. Effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy versus collaborative assessment and
management of suicidality treatment for reduction of self-harm in adults with borderline personality traits and disorders - A
randomized observer-blinded clinical trial. Depress Anxiety. 2016;33(6):520-530.
REFERENCES 97

350. Ryberg W, Zahl P, Diep LM, Landro NI, Fosse R. Managing suicidality within specialized care: A randomized controlled trial. J
AffectDisord. 2019;249:112-120.
351. Jobes DA, Comtois KA, Gutierrez PM, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the collaborative assessment and management of
suicidality versus enhanced care as usual with suicidal soldiers. Psychiatry. 2017;80(4):339-356.
352. Swift JK, Trusty WT, Penix EA. The effectiveness of the Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS)
compared to alternative treatment conditions: A meta-analysis. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2021;51(5):882-896.
353. Kim MH, Lee J, Noh H, et al. Effectiveness of a flexible and continuous case management program for suicide attempters. Int J
Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(7):2599.
354. Jobes DA, Vergara GA, Lanzillo EC, Ridge-Anderson A. The potential use of CAMS for suicidal youth: Building on epidemiology
and clinical interventions. Child Health Care. 2019;48(4):444-468.
355. Dimeff LA, Jobes DA, Chalker SA, et al. A novel engagement of suicidality in the emergency department: Virtual Collaborative
Assessment and Management of Suicidality. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2020;63:119-126.
356. Horowitz LM, Snyder DJ, Boudreaux ED, et al. Validation of the Ask Suicide-Screening Questions for adult medical inpatients: A
brief tool for all ages. Psychosomatics. 2020;61(6):713-722.
357. Boudreaux ED, Jaques ML, Brady KM, Matson A, Allen MH. The patient safety screener: Validation of a brief suicide risk
screener for emergency department settings. Arch Suicide Res.
358. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity and internal consistency
findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266-1277.
359. Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Morris DW, et al. Concise Health Risk Tracking scale: brief self-report and clinician rating of
suicidal risk. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72(6):757-764.
360. Runeson B, Odeberg J, Pettersson A, Edbom T, Jildevik Adamsson I, Waern M. Instruments for the assessment of suicide risk: A
systematic review evaluating the certainty of the evidence. PLoS One. 2017;12(7):e0180292.
361. Harris IM, Beese S, Moore D. Predicting future self-harm or suicide in adolescents: A systematic review of risk assessment
scales/tools. BMJ Open. 2019;9(9):e029311.
362. Brucker K, Duggan C, Niezer J, et al. Assessing risk of future suicidality in emergency department patients. Acad Emerg Med.
2019;26(4):376-383.
363. Bernert RA, Hilberg AM, Melia R, Kim JP, Shah NH, Abnousi F. Artificial intelligence and suicide prevention: A systematic review
of machine learning investigations. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(16):5929.
364. Barak-Corren Y, Castro VM, Nock MK, et al. Validation of an electronic health record-based suicide risk prediction modeling
approach across multiple health care systems. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(3):e201262.
365. Pitman A, Osborn D, King M, Erlangsen A. Effects of suicide bereavement on mental health and suicide risk. Lancet Psychiatry.
2014;1(1):86-94.
366. Niederkrotenthaler T, Sonneck G. Assessing the impact of media guidelines for reporting on suicides in Austria: Interrupted
time series analysis. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2007;41(5):419-428.
367. Etzersdorfer E, Sonneck G. Preventing suicide by influencing mass-media reporting. The Viennese experience 1980–1996. Arch
Suicide Res. 1998;4(1):67-74.
368. Gould MS, Kleinman MH, Lake AM, Forman J, Midle JB. Newspaper coverage of suicide and initiation of suicide clusters in
teenagers in the USA, 1988-96: A retrospective, population-based, case-control study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2014;1(1):34-43.
369. Acosta J, Ramchand R, Becker A. Best practices for suicide prevention messaging and evaluating California’s “Know the Signs”
media campaign. Crisis. 2017;38(5):287-299.
370. Visser VS, Comans TA, Scuffham PA. Evaluation of the effectiveness of a community-based crisis intervention program for
people bereaved by suicide. J Community Psychol. 2014;42(1):19-28.
371. Gehrmann M, Dixon SD, Visser VS, Griffin M. Evaluating the outcomes for bereaved people supported by a community-based
suicide bereavement service. Crisis. 2020;41(6):437-444.
372. Zisook S, Shear MK, Reynolds CF, et al. Treatment of complicated grief in survivors of suicide loss: A HEAL report. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2018;79(2):17m11592.
373. Cerel J, Campbell FR. Suicide survivors seeking mental health services: A preliminary examination of the role of an active
postvention model. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2008;38(1):30-34.
98 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

374. Niederkrotenthaler T, Braun M, Pirkis J, et al. Association between suicide reporting in the media and suicide: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2020;368:m575.
375. Niederkrotenthaler T, Voracek M, Herberth A, et al. Media and suicide. Papageno v Werther effect. BMJ. 2010;341:c5841.
376. Szumilas M, Kutcher S. Post-suicide intervention programs: A systematic review. Can J Public Health. 2011;102(1):18-29.
377. Torok M, Calear A, Shand F, Christensen H. A systematic review of mass media campaigns for suicide prevention:
Understanding their efficacy and the mechanisms needed for successful behavioral and literacy change. Suicide Life Threat
Behav. 2017;47(6):672-687.
378. Pirkis J, Rossetto A, Nicholas A, Ftanou M, Robinson J, Reavley N. Suicide prevention media campaigns: A systematic literature
review. Health Commun. 2019;34(4):402-414.
379. Kennedy KS, Carmichael A, Brown MM, Trudeau A, Martinez P, Stone DM. The State of State, Territorial, and Tribal Suicide
Prevention: Findings from a Web-Based Survey: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2021. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/suicide/pdf/State-of-the-States-Report-Final-508.pdf.
380. Crosby AE, Ortega L, Melanson C. Self-DirectedViolenceSurveillance:UniformDefinitionsandRecommendedDataElements.
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2019.
381. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Vital Statistics System. 2021; Atlanta, GA. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/nvss/deaths.htm.
382. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Violent Death Reporting System. 2021; Atlanta, GA. Availabe at: https://
www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/nvdrs.html.
383. The National Center for the Review & Prevention of Child Deaths. U.S. Child Death Review Programs. https://ncfrp.org/cdr/.
384. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Syndromic Surveillance Program. 2021; Atlanta, GA. Available at: https://
www.cdc.gov/nssp/index.html.
385. Zwald ML, Holland KM, Annor FB, et al. Syndromic surveillance of suicidal ideation and self-directed violence - United States,
January 2017-December 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(4):103-108.
386. Yard E, Radhakrishnan L, Ballesteros MF, et al. Emergency department visits for suspected suicide attempts among persons
aged 12-25 years before and during the COVID-19 pandemic--United States, January 2019-May 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2021;70888-894.
387. Smalley CM, Malone DA, Meldon SW, et al. The impact of COVID-19 on suicidal ideation and alcohol presentations to
emergency departments in a large healthcare system. Am J Emerg Med. 2020;41:237-238.
388. Czeisler ME, Lane RI, Petrosky E, et al. Menta health, substance use, and suicidal ideation during the COVID-19 pandemic--
United States, June 24-30, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(32):1049-1057.
389. Brener ND, Kann L, Shanklin S, et al. Methodology of the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System--2013. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2013;62(1):1-20.
390. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Behavioral health trends in the United States: Results from
the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 2015; Rockville, MD. Available at: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/
behavioral-health-trends-united-states-results-2014-national-survey-drug-use-and-health.
391. Walkup JT, Townsend L, Crystal S, Olfson M. A systematic review of validated methods for identifying suicide or suicidal
ideation using administrative or claims data. 2012;21(S1):174-182.
392. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting. 2021; Atlanta, GA.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/icd/10cmguidelines-FY2021.pdf.
393. Owens PL, McDermott KW, Lipari RN, Hambrick MM. Emergency Department Visits Related to Suicidal Ideation or Suicide Attempt,
2008-2017. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2020. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/33074641/.
394. Owens PL, Fingar KR, Heslin KC, Mutter R, Booth CL. Emergency Department Visits Related to Suicidal Ideation, 2006-2013.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28722846/.
395. Acosta JD, Ramchand R, Becker A, Felton A, Kofner A. RAND Suicide Prevention Program Evaluation Toolkit. RAND Corporation;
2013. Available at: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL111.html.
REFERENCES 99

APPENDIX
SUMMARY OF STRATEGIES AND
APPROACHES TO PREVENT SUICIDE
STRATEGY: STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC SUPPORTS
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
IMPROVE HOUSEHOLD FINANCIAL SECURITY
Unemployment insurance benefits
Other unemployment support practices
(e.g., job skills training)
Other household financial security measures
(e.g., transfer payments, medical benefits, and + Government
family assistance) (local, state,
federal)
State supplements to federal + Business/
Earned Income Tax Credits
Labor
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Early access to Social Security benefits
Increased minimum wages
STABILIZE HOUSING
Rent assistance to renters with lower incomes
Low-barrier housing for individuals
experiencing chronic homelessness
Veterans Health Administration
homeless programs
100 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

STRATEGY: CREATE PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENTS
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
REDUCE ACCESS TO LETHAL MEANS AMONG PERSONS AT RISK OF SUICIDE
Interventions to reduce readily accessible
environmental means (e.g., bridges, pesticides)
+ Government
Safe storage (e.g., Counseling on Access to
(local, state)
Lethal Means (CALM)
+ Public Health
Child Access Prevention (CAP) laws to + Healthcare
reduce firearm self-injuries and suicides
+ Business/
among young people
Labor
Mandatory waiting periods to reduce
firearm suicides
CREATE HEALTHY ORGANIZATIONAL POLICIES AND CULTURE
United States Air Force Suicide
Prevention Program + Government
(local, state,
Together for Life federal)
+ Military
Strong Schools Against Suicidality
+ Justice
and Self-Injury
+ Education
Correctional suicide prevention
REDUCE SUBSTANCE USE THROUGH COMMUNITY-BASED POLICIES AND PRACTICES
Reduce alcohol outlet density + Government
(local, state)
Prescription drug supply restrictions + Business/
(e.g., PDMPs) Labor
APPENDIX 101

STRATEGY: IMPROVE ACCESS AND DELIVERY OF SUICIDE CARE
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
COVER MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS IN HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES
+ Government
Mental health parity laws (state, federal)
+ Healthcare
INCREASE PROVIDER AVAILABILITY IN UNDERSERVED AREAS
National Health Service Corps + Government
(federal)
Community mental health clinics + Healthcare
PROVIDE RAPID AND REMOTE ACCESS TO HELP
Telemental health (e.g., telephone, clinical
+ Healthcare
video appointments)
+ Public health
Mobile applications + Business/
Labor
Internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy
CREATE SAFER SUICIDE CARE THROUGH SYSTEMS CHANGE
Zero Suicide + Healthcare
102 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

STRATEGY: PROMOTE HEALTHY CONNECTIONS
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
PROMOTE HEALTHY PEER NORMS
Sources of Strength
+ Public Health
+ Education
Wingman-Connect
ENGAGE COMMUNITY MEMBERS IN SHARED ACTIVITIES
Greening vacant urban spaces + Public Health
+ Government
(local)
+ Community
Nonprofit
APPENDIX 103

STRATEGY: TEACH COPING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING SKILLS
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
SUPPORT SOCIAL-EMOTIONAL LEARNING PROGRAMS
Youth Aware of Mental Health Program
Good Behavior Game
Aussie Optimism Program
Signs of Suicide
TEACH PARENTING SKILLS TO IMPROVE FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS
+ Public Health
The Incredible Years + Education
+ Social Services
Strengthening Families Program
+ Nonprofit
Family Check-Up
Family Bereavement Program
Familias Unidas
After Deployment Adaptive Parenting Tools
(ADAPT)
SUPPORT RESILIENCE THROUGH EDUCATION PROGRAMS
Resilience training programs (e.g., colleges, + Education
workplaces) + Business/
Labor
104 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

STRATEGY: IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
TRAIN GATEKEEPERS
Applied Suicide Intervention Skills Training
Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide
+ Government
Prevention Program
(federal)
+ Public Health
Question Persuade Refer (QPR)
+ Healthcare
Mental Health First Aid and Teen Mental
Health First Aid
RESPOND TO CRISES
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline + Government
(local, state,
(now called 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline)
federal)
+ Social Services
Virtual Hope Box (VHB)
+ Healthcare
+ Business/
Jaspr Health Labor
PLAN FOR SAFETY AND FOLLOW-UP AFTER AN ATTEMPT
Safety planning
Safety Planning Intervention with Structured
Follow-up (SPI+)
+ Healthcare
Follow-up contacts
+ Social services
Emergency Department Safety Assessment
and Follow-up Evaluation (ED SAFE)
Attempted Suicide Short Intervention Program
PROVIDE THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES
Improving Mood – Promoting Access to
Collaborative Treatment (IMPACT)
Prevention of Suicide in Primary Care Elderly + Healthcare
Clinical Trial (PROSPECT)
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)
APPENDIX 105

STRATEGY: IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT PEOPLE AT RISK
(CONTINUED)
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
PROVIDE THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES (CONTINUED)
SAFETY
CBT for Suicide Prevention (CBT-SP)
+ Healthcare
Brief CBT (BCBT)
Problem Solving Therapy (PST)
Collaborative Assessment and Management
of Suicidality (CAMS)
STRATEGY: LESSEN HARMS AND PREVENT FUTURE RISK
Other Risk/
Suicide
Protective
Approach/Program, Practice or Policy Suicide Ideation or Lead Sectors
Factors for
Attempts
Suicide
INTERVENE AFTER A SUICIDE
StandBy Support After Suicide
+ Healthcare
Complicated Grief Treatment + Public Health
+ Social Services
Family Bereavement Program
REPORT AND MESSAGE ABOUT SUICIDE SAFELY
Safe Reporting Guidelines + Public Health
+ Media
106 SUICIDE PREVENTION RESOURCE FOR ACTION

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Center for Injury
Prevention and Control
www.cdc.gov/suicide

