Q and A on Mental Health as a Barrier to Academic Success at CUNY
March 2019 | A Report by Healthy CUNY and CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy
hinder one’s ability to function normally. But anxiety disorders are
treatable, and several effective treatments are available. Treatment
helps most people lead normal productive lives.8
A more general term, psychological distress is defined as a state of
emotional suffering characterized by symptoms of depression or
anxiety. Those experiencing psychological distress may also have
physical symptoms such as insomnia, headaches, or lack of energy,
symptoms that may vary across cultures.9
1. how are mental health problems like 2. how many cuny students are affected
depression, anxiety and psychological by depression, anxiety or moderate or
distress a problem for cuny students? severe psychological distress?
Mental health problems, especially depression and anxiety, are Based on the 2018 Healthy CUNY survey of a representative sample
a leading health cause of college failure and dropout, at CUNY of CUNY community college and 4 year college students, it is
and in colleges around the country.1,2,3 Students from lower estimated that 40,329 undergraduates report symptoms of depression,
socioeconomic backgrounds are at higher risk for developing 47,662 report symptoms of anxiety disorders and 40,818 report
such problems.4,5 Depression and anxiety can impair students’ symptoms associated with moderate or severe psychological distress.10
engagement with school and their academic performance. While rates did not differ much among different racial/ethnic groups,
These conditions can also contribute to substance abuse, further white students had slightly higher rates of all 3 conditions than did
impeding academic progress.6 Depressed students are also at students of other racial/ethnic groups. Table 1 shows that symptoms
higher risk for suicide. of these three conditions vary by other student characteristics.
Depression is a common and serious medical illness that negatively Table 1 shows that about one in six CUNY undergraduates experience
affects how people feel, the way they think and how they act. It depression, one in five experience anxiety disorders, and one in six
can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems and can report moderate or severe psychological distress. Students in four-year
decrease a person’s ability to function at school or work and at schools report higher levels of anxiety disorders than their community
home.7 Common symptoms, when they last more than two weeks, college peers. Female students report higher levels of all three
are feeling sad or having a depressed mood, loss of interest or conditions than male students. Students with household incomes
pleasure in activities once enjoyed, changes in appetite and weight lower than $30,000 a year report higher levels of all three conditions
loss or gain unrelated to dieting, trouble sleeping or sleeping too than their peers living in households with incomes of $30,000 or more
much, loss of energy or increased fatigue, feeling worthless or per year. Finally, students born in the United States report higher
guilty, difficulty thinking, concentrating or making decisions, or levels of all three conditions than their foreign-born peers. Not shown
thoughts of death or suicide. Fortunately, depression is treatable. on the table, 64 percent of those reporting depression, anxiety or
Anxiety disorders differ from normal feelings of nervousness or moderate or severe psychological distress also reported experiencing
anxiousness and involve excessive fear or anxiety. For a person to two or more of 11 common life stressors.11 Overall, 53 percent of
be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, the fear or anxiety must CUNY students reported experiencing two or more of these life
be out of proportion to the situation or age inappropriate or stressors.
Table 1. Percentage of CUNY undergraduates reporting depression, anxiety, or psychological distress, Fall 2018
30
20
10
0
All CUNY 4 year Community Female Male Income Income US Born Foreign Born
schools Colleges < $30k > $30k
Depression Anxiety Moderate/Severe Psychological Distress
Q AND A ON MENTAL HEALTH | 1
AS A BARRIER TO ACADEMIC
SUCCESS AT CUNY

Table 3. CUNY students use of mental health services, Fall 2017
30
20
10
0
Received any treatment Used online information Used campus
from a professional or services counseling center
All CUNY Depression Anxiety Moderate/Severe Psychological Distress
3. how do these mental health counseling center, which are staffed by 116 full-time mental health
conditions affect academic success? professionals. Staffing levels range from one to ten professionals
per campus, with several campuses and the university as a whole
Students who are depressed learn less, don’t learn as well, and learn falling short of the professional to student ratio recommended by
more slowly than their peers. Studies on depressed college students college mental health professional organizations. Many campuses
show they have lower grade point averages (GPAs) and lower levels also prepare students to provide education, outreach or emotional
of academic persistence and achievement compared with peers who support to peers with mental health concerns.
are not depressed.12 Students with unrecognized and untreated Table 3 shows survey findings on knowledge and use of mental
depression are hindered in courses, internships, and leadership health services by CUNY undergraduates from the 2018 survey.
development experiences, and are at higher risk for considering It shows that one in nine CUNY undergraduates has received
or attempting suicide, even among those with only moderate help from a mental health professional in the last 12 months and
depression. that those reporting symptoms of depression, anxiety disorders
CUNY students report that mental health conditions interfere with and moderate or severe psychological distress are more than three
their school work. On the 2018 Healthy CUNY survey, 55 percent times as likely to get help as all students. Disturbingly, about three
of CUNY students with depression, 52 percent of those with quarters of students with the symptoms associated with the three
anxiety disorders and 58 percent of those with moderate or severe conditions have not seen a professional in the last year.
psychological distress report that their mental health symptoms The table also shows that students with symptoms are also more
interfere with their school work somewhat, moderately or a lot. For than three times as likely to have used online mental health
the entire sample, only 20 percent report these levels of interference. information or support services as students without symptoms (22
The Healthy CUNY survey also examined rates of academic percent versus 7 percent), suggesting that expanding access to online
problems such as dropping out of a degree program, taking a leave services may connect more students with symptoms to sources of
of absence, failing out of school, or having a GPA equal or less information or support. Finally, the table shows that 6 percent of
than 2.5. Compared to students who did not report symptoms of CUNY undergraduates visited the campus mental health counseling
depression, anxiety disorders or moderate or severe psychological center in the last 12 months while about 14 percent of those with
distress, students with any of these conditions indicated higher symptoms of the three conditions report such a visit. Of note,
levels of any such academic problems with 30 percent of those with students were almost twice as likely to have gone online for help
symptoms reporting any academic problem versus 26 percent of than visited the campus counseling center. Overall, 86 percent of
those who did not report symptoms. those with these symptoms have not used campus mental health
counseling centers.
4. what services are available for The 2018 survey showed (not on table) that about half of students
mental health concerns on cuny know that mental health professionals are available on their campus
and about 8 percent have gotten mental health information or
campuses?
support from another student. Rates of knowledge of campus
services or getting help from another student is higher among those
To assist its students to get help for depression, anxiety disorders,
with symptoms compared to those without symptoms.
psychological distress, and other mental health conditions, CUNY
offers a variety of campus services and referrals to community
services. Twenty-one of CUNY’s 24 campuses have a mental health
Q AND A ON MENTAL HEALTH | 2
AS A BARRIER TO ACADEMIC
SUCCESS AT CUNY

5. what obstacles make it hard for cuny The CUNY Health for Academic Success and Engagement
students to get help for this problem? Steering Committee is considering several strategies to ensure
that all CUNY students get the help they need to overcome
Healthy CUNY surveys and focus groups identified several mental health problems that can interfere with academic success.
These include:
obstacles that make it harder for students to get the help they
need for psychological problems:
• Hire more mental health professionals to serve in
CUNY mental health counselling centers so that more
• About half of CUNY students agree with the
students can be reached and waiting time reduced
statements that (1) most people feel that receiving mental
health treatment is a sign of personal failure and (2) most • Prepare students to serve as peer health advocates who
people think less of a person who has received mental can promote use of campus and community mental health
health treatment. “Poor mental health carries such a stigma services, educate students about available services and
that people are even afraid to go somewhere and find out campaign to reduce stigma
that their condition is going to be classified as mental
• Train faculty to provide accurate, appropriate and brief
illness,” explained one student in a focus group.
information and referrals to their students who ask for
• Students reported trouble finding the time to get help. assistance for mental health problems
As one student explained in a focus group, “you need to
• Develop stronger partnerships with citywide and
find the right time and that is the hardest part actually
community-based mental health providers to make it
going in because time is valuable.” Stigma was another
easier for CUNY students to get help and for CUNY to
obstacle. Our analysis of the survey found that as depressive
get appropriate feedback to assist students to overcome
symptoms increased so did self-stigma regarding seeking
problems
mental health assistance, a negative cycle that interferes
with getting effective help. • Develop and promote use of online mental health
services designed for CUNY students
6. what are some ways cuny can reduce
The goal of these suggestions is to create a stronger culture of
the extent of this problem or minimize caring at CUNY, a climate that will encourage all students to
its impact on academic success? seek help and all students, faculty and staff to provide help to
reduce the burden of mental health problems. The CHASE
Connecting students in need of mental health support to Steering Committee welcomes your feedback on these suggestions
and welcomes your recommendations for additional ways to
services is crucial, as early intervention can reduce the adverse
strengthen mental health services for CUNY students.
consequences of depression, thereby helping students to improve
their well-being and complete their degrees.13,14 Send your comments to Patricia.Lamberson@sph.cuny.edu.
Q AND A ON MENTAL HEALTH | 3
AS A BARRIER TO ACADEMIC
SUCCESS AT CUNY

references
WHAT’S
1 Fletcher JM. Adolescent depression and educational attainment:
results using sibling fixed effects. Health Econ. 2010;19(7):855-871.
UP?
2 Kessler RC, Foster CL, Saunders WB, Stang PE. Social consequences
of psychiatric disorders, I: educational attainment. Am J Psychiatry.
1995;152(7):1026-1032.
3 Eisenberg D, Golberstein E, Hunt JB. Mental health and academic
success in college mental health and academic success in college. J Econ
Anal Policy. 2009;9(1).
4 Weitzman ER. Poor mental health, depression, and associations with
alcohol consumption, harm, and abuse in a national sample of young
adults in college. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2004;192(4):269-277.
5 Eisenberg D, Gollust SE, Golberstein E, Hefner JL. Prevalence and
correlates of depression, anxiety, and suicidality among university
students. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 2007;77(4):534-542.
6 Douce LA, Keeling RP. A Strategic Primer on College Student Mental
Health. Washington DC; 2014.
7 American Psychiatric Association. What is depression? https://www.
psychiatry.org/patients-families/depression/what-isdepression
8 American Psychiatric Association. What are anxiety disorders? https://
www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/anxietydisorders/what-are-anxiety-
disorders
9 Drapeau A, Marchand A, Beaulieu-Prévost D. Epidemiology of
Psychological Distress, http://cdn.intechopen.com/pdfs/25512/InTech-
Nothing. Epidemiology_of_psychological_distress.pdf
10 Depression, anxiety and psychological distress were measured
with the PHQ 4, a validated and commonly used survey to assess these
three conditions. See . Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Löwe B.
An ultra-brief screening scale for anxiety and depression: the PHQ-4.
Psychosomatics. 2009; 50(6):613-621.
11 The life stressors experienced in the past 12 months included on the
WHAT’S survey were : having children under 18 years living at home; having debt of
more than $5,5000; having a housing problem; working 20 hours a week
REALLY or more; having pregnancy or a pregnant partner; experiencing intimate
partner violence; reporting hunger often or sometimes; not having health
UP? insurance; not having a regular source of healthcare; having one or e more
chronic health conditions; or having an annual household income of less
than $30,000.
Been anxious lately.
Might have to change majors. 12 Douce LA, Keeling RP. A Strategic Primer on College Student Mental
Miss my family back home. Health. Washington DC; 2014.
Bills are piling up.
13 Chung H, Klein MC, Silverman D, et al. A pilot for improving
Too many papers to write.
depression care on college campuses: results of the College Breakthrough
It’s hard to socialize.
Series-Depression (CBS-D) project. J Am Coll Heal . 2011;59(7):628-639.
Feels hard to breathe.
It’s a little easier knowing 15 Lee D, Olson EA, Locke B, et al. The effects of college counseling
someone’s there to listen. services on academic performance and retention. J Coll Stud Dev.
Thanks for asking. 2009;50(3):305-319.
I’m glad you were
really listening
suggested citation
to me...
We’re Healthy CUNY Survey Group and, Freudenberg N. Q and A on Mental
Health as a Barrier to Academic Success at CUNY. CUNY School of Public
listening. Health, 2019.
Lehman Counseling Center
114 Old Gym Building
718) 960-8761
counseling.center@lehman.cuny.edu
sph.cuny.edu/healthycuny
#HealthyCUNY
Q AND A ON MENTAL HEALTH | 4
AS A BARRIER TO ACADEMIC
SUCCESS AT CUNY

