UNDERSTANDING MAJOR
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
WHAT IS MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER?
Major depressive disorder (also known as major
depression) is one of the most common mental
disorders in the United States. It can seriously
impact every aspect of a person’s life—affecting
how they feel, think, and handle everyday activities.
Major depression can happen at any age but often
begins in adulthood.
The exact causes of major depression are unknown,
but some risk factors include a family history of
depression and significant life changes such as
trauma, stress, or death of a loved one. Major
depression is also linked to other serious medical
illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease,
and Parkinson’s disease.
The subject in this photo is a model for illustrative purposes only.
COMMON SIGNS & SYMPTOMS OF MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
Some of these signs and symptoms must be present for at
least two weeks to be diagnosed with major depressive
disorder. Anyone who has questions should consult their doctor.
• Long-term feelings of sadness, hopelessness,
pessimism, emptiness
• Anxiety, irritability, restlessness
• Feelings of guilt or worthlessness
• Loss of interest or joy in normal hobbies and activities
• Fatigue, lack of energy
• Changes in appetite that lead to weight loss or weight gain
• Moving, talking, or thinking more slowly
• Trouble concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
• Sleep issues such as insomnia, waking up very early, or
sleeping too much
• Unexplained aches and pains, such as headaches or
digestive problems
• Thoughts of death or suicide, or suicide attempts The subject in this photo is a model for illustrative purposes only.
SAMHSA’s mission is to reduce the impact of substance abuse and mental illness on America’s communities.
1-877-SAMHSA-7 (1-877-726-4727) • 1-800-487-4889 (TDD) • www.samhsa.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration

TYPES OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
THERE ARE SEVERAL TYPES OF DISORDERS THAT FALL UNDER MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS:
Postpartum Depression Psychotic Depression Seasonal Affective Disorder Melancholic Depression
affects women after is a form of depression is a mood disorder directly is a form of depression
childbirth and causes with psychosis that may caused by the time of the in which people exhibit a
extreme anxiety and include delusions and/ year, most often occurring complete loss of pleasure
sadness, making it or hallucinations where in the winter months in all or almost everything.
difficult for mothers to the person is both when sunlight is not as
care for themselves and/ depressed and out of readily available.
or their babies. touch with reality.
TREATMENT
Even the most severe cases of depression can be
treated with medication, therapy, or both. And the
earlier a person begins treatment, the more effective
it is. Treatment for major depression, just like
hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease, requires
long-term management of symptoms.
• M edication: Antidepressant medicines
may help improve the way a person’s brain
controls mood or stress and reduce symptoms.
Antidepressants usually take two to four weeks
to take effect. Sleep, appetite, and problems
concentrating often improve before a noticeable
mood shift, so it is important to give medication
a chance to work.
• Therapy: Talking to a mental health professional
is effective in helping people identify triggers,
create positive behaviors, manage stress, set
goals, and stick to a treatment plan.
The subject in this photo is a model for illustrative purposes only.
NEED HELP OR MORE INFORMATION?
If you or someone you know has major depressive disorder, these resources can help. Visit SAMHSA’s Early
Serious Mental Treatment Locator and Behavioral Health Treatment Locator at SAMHSA.gov. Or, call
SAMHSA’s National Helpline at 1-800-662-HELP (4357) or 1-800-487-4889 (TDD).
Learn more at SAMHSA.gov/Serious-Mental-Illness
SAMHSA’s mission is to reduce the impact of substance abuse and mental illness on America’s communities.
1-877-SAMHSA-7 (1-877-726-4727) • 1-800-487-4889 (TDD) • www.samhsa.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration

